The Project Gutenberg EBook of Divine Songs, by Isaac Watts

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Divine Songs

Author: Isaac Watts

Release Date: September 11, 2004 [EBook #13439]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIVINE SONGS ***




Produced by Lewis Jones





Divine Songs

Attempted in the Easy Language of Children.

By I. Watts.

_Out of the Mouth of Babes and Sucklings thou hast perfected
Praise_. Matt. xxi. 16.


Transcriber's Note.

Throughout, modern numerals have been substituted for their Roman
equivalents.

In Watts' dedication the original capitalisation, italics and
spelling are retained; the aim thereby is to convey more accurately
the flavour of the original.



TO

Mrs. SARAH     )
Mrs. MARY _and_) ABNEY,
Mrs. ELIZABETH )

_Daughters of Sir_ THOMAS ABNEY, _Kt. and Alderman of London_.


_My Dear Young Friends_,

Whom I am constrained to love and honour by many Obligations. It was
the generous and condescending Friendship of your Parents under my
weak Circumstances of Health, that brought me to their Country-Seat
for the Benefit of the Air; but it was an Instance of most uncommon
Kindness, to supply me there so chearfully for two Years of Sickness
with the richest Conveniences of Life. Such a Favour requires my
most affectionate Returns of Service to themselves, and to all that
is dear to them; and meer Gratitude demands some solemn and publick
Acknowledgment.

But great Minds have the true Relish and Pleasure of doing Good, and
are content to be unknown.

It is such a silent Satisfaction Sir _Thomas Abney_ enjoys in the
unspeakable Blessings of this Year, that brought our present King to
the Throne: and he permits the World to forget that happy Turn that
was given to the Affairs of the Kingdom by his wise Management in
the Highest Office of the City, whereby the Settlement of the Crown
was so much strengthen'd in the Illustrious Family which now
possesses it. O may the Crown flourish many Years on the Head of our
Soveraign, and may his House possess it to the End of Time, to
secure all Religious and Civil Liberties to the Posterity of those
who have been so zealous to establish this Succession!

The fair and lovely Character your Honoured Father hath acquired by
passing thro' all the chief Offices of the City, and leaving a
Lustre upon them, seems imperfect in his own Esteem, without the
Addition of this Title, _A Succourer and a Friend of the Ministers
of Christ_. And in this part of his Honour the Lady your Mother is
resolved to have an unborrow'd Share, and becomes his daily Rival.

It is to her unwearied Tenderness, and many kind Offices by Night
and Day, in the more violent Seasons of my Indisposition, that
(under God) I own my Life, and Power to write or think. And while I
remember those Hours, I can't forget the cheerful and ready
Attendance of her worthy Sister, her dear Companion and Assistant in
every good Work.

Under the Influence of two such Examples I have also enjoy'd the
Pleasure and Conveniency of your younger Services, according to the
Capacity of your Years; and that with such a Degree of sincere and
hearty Zeal for my Welfare, that you are ready to vie with each
other in the kind Imployment, and assist all you can toward my
Recovery and Usefulness. So that whoever shall reap benefit by any
of my Labours, it is but a reasonable Request, that you share with
me in their Thanks and their Prayers.

But this is a small Part of your Praise.

If it would not be suspected of Flattery, I could tell the World
what an Acquaintance with Scripture, what a Knowledge of Religion,
what a Memory of Divine things both in Verse and Prose is found
among you; and what a just and regular account is given of Sermons
at your Age; to awaken all the Children that shall read these
_Songs_, to furnish their memories and beautify their Souls like
yours. The Honour you have done me in learning by heart so large a
number of the _Hymns_ I have publish'd, perhaps has been of some use
towards these greater Improvements, and gives me rich Encouragement
to offer you this little Present.

Since I have ventured to shew a Part of your early Character to the
World, I perswade my self you will remember, that it must inlarge
and brighten daily. Remember what the World will expect from the
Daughters of Sir _Thomas Abney's_ Family, under such an Education,
such Examples, and after such fair and promising Blossoms of Piety
and Goodness. Remember what God himself will expect at your hands,
from whose Grace you have received plentiful Distributions in the
Beginning of your Days. May the Blessings of his Right Hand more
enrich you daily, as your Capacities and your Years increase; and
may he add bountifully of the Favours of his Left Hand, Riches and
Honour. May his Grace make you so large a Return of all the Kindness
I have received in your Family, as may prevail above the fondest
Hopes of your Parents, and even exceed the warmest Prayers of

_Your most Affectionate Monitor and obliged Servant in the daily
Views of a future World_,


I. WATTS.

Theobalds,

June 18.
1715.


PREFACE
To all that are concerned in the Education of Children.



My Friends,

It is an awful and important charge that is committed to you. The
wisdom and welfare of the succeeding generation are intrusted with
you beforehand, and depend much on your conduct. The seeds of misery
or happiness in this world, and that to come, are oftentimes sown
very early, and therefore whatever may conduce to give the minds of
children a relish for vertue and religion, ought in the first place
to be proposed to you.

Verse was at first design'd for the service of God, tho' it hath
been wretchedly abused since. The ancients among the Jews and the
Heathens taught their children and disciples the precepts of
morality and worship in verse. The children of Israel were commanded
to learn the words of the song of Moses, Deut. 31. 19,30. And we are
directed in the New Testament, not only to sing with grace in the
heart, but to teach and admonish one another by hymns and songs,
Eph. 5. 19. and there are these four advantages in it:

1. There is a greater delight in the very learning of truths and
duties this way. There is something so amusing and entertaining in
rhymes and metre, that will incline children to make this part of
their business a diversion. And you may turn their very duty into a
reward, by giving them the privilege of learning one of these songs
every week, if they fulfil the business of the week well, and
promising them the book itself when they have learned ten or twenty
songs out of it.

2. What is learnt in verse is longer retained in memory, and sooner
recollected. The like sounds and the like number of syllables
exceedingly assist the remembrance. And it may often happen, that
the end of a song running in the mind may be an effectual means to
keep off some temptation, or to incline to some duty, when a word of
scripture is not upon the thoughts.

3. This will be a constant furniture for the minds of children, that
they may have something to think upon when alone, and sing over to
themselves. This may sometimes give their thoughts a divine turn,
and raise a young meditation. Thus they will not be forced to seek
relief for an emptiness of mind out of the loose and dangerous
sonnets of the age.

4. These _Divine Songs_ may be a pleasant and proper matter for
their daily or weekly worship, to sing one in the family at such
time as the parents or governors shall appoint; and therefore I have
confin'd the verse to the most usual psalm tunes.

The greatest part of this little book was composed several years
ago, at the request of a friend, who has been long engaged in the
work of catechising a very great number of children of all kinds,
and with abundant skill and success. So that you will find here
nothing that savours of a party: the children of high and low
degree, of the Church of England or Dissenters, baptized in infancy
or not, may all join together in these songs. And as I have
endeavoured to sink the language to the level of a child's
understanding, and yet to keep it (if possible) above contempt; so I
have designed to profit all (if possible) and offend none. I hope
the more general the sense is, these composures may be of the more
universal use and service.

I have added at the end an attempt or two of _Sonnets_ on _Moral
Subjects_ for children, with an air of pleasantry, to provoke some
fitter pen to write a little book of them. My talent doth not lie
that way, and a man on the borders of the grave has other work.
Besides, if I had health or leisure to lay out this way, it should
be employ'd in finishing the _Psalms_, which I have so long promised
the world.

May the Almighty God make you faithful in this important work of
education: may he succeed your cares with his abundant graces, that
the rising generation of Great Britain may be a glory amongst the
nations, a pattern to the Christian world, and a blessing to the
earth.



Divine Songs

For

Children.


Song 1.
_A General Song of Praise to God_.

1 How glorious is our Heavenly King,
Who reigns above the sky!
How shall a child presume to sing
His dreadful majesty?

2 How great his power is none can tell,
Nor think how large his grace;
Not men below, nor saints that dwell
On high before his face.

3 Not angels that stand round the Lord
Can search his secret will;
But they perform his heavenly word,
And sing his praises still.

4 Then let me join this holy train,
And my first offerings bring;
Th' eternal God will not disdain
To hear an infant sing.

5 My heart resolves, my tongue obeys,
And angels shall rejoice
To hear their mighty Maker's praise
Sound from a feeble voice.


Song 2.
_Praise for Creation and Providence_.

1 I sing th' almighty power of God,
That made the mountains rise,
That spread the flowing seas abroad,
And built the lofty skies.

2 I sing the wisdom that ordain'd
The sun to rule the day;
The moon shines full at his command,
And all the stars obey.

3 I sing the goodness of the Lord,
That fill'd the earth with food;
He form'd the creatures with his Word,
And then pronounced them good.

4 Lord, how thy wonders are display'd
Where'er I turn mine eye,
If I survey the ground I tread,
Or gaze upon the sky.

5 There's not a plant or flower below
But makes thy glories known;
And clouds arise and tempests blow
By order from thy throne.

6 Creatures (as num'rous as they be)
Are subject to thy care:
There's not a place where we can flee,
But God is present there.

7 In heaven he shines with beams of love,
With wrath in hell beneath:
'Tis on his earth I stand or move,
And 'tis his air I breathe.

8 His hand is my perpetual guard,
He keeps me with his eye:
Why should I then forget the Lord
Who is for ever nigh?


Song 3.
_Praise to God for our Redemption_.

1 Blest be the wisdom and the power,
The justice and the grace,
That join'd in council to restore
And save our ruin'd race!

2 Our father eat forbidden fruit,
And from his glory fell;
And we, his children, thus were brought
To death, and near to hell.

3 Blest be the Lord, that sent his Son
To take our flesh and blood;
He for our lives gave up his own,
To make our peace with God.

4 He honour'd all his Father's laws,
Which we have disobey'd;
He bore our sins upon the cross,
And our full ransom paid.

5 Behold him rising from the grave;
Behold him rais'd on high:
He pleads his merits there to save
Transgressors doom'd to die.

6 There on a glorious throne, he reigns,
And by his power divine
Redeems us from the slavish chains
Of Satan, and of sin.

7 Thence shall the Lord to judgment come,
And, with a sovereign voice,
Shall call, and break up every tomb,
While waking saints rejoice.

8 O may I then with joy appear
Before the Judge's face,
And, with the blest assembly there,
Sing his redeeming grace!


Song 4.
_Praise for Mercies Spiritual and Temporal_.

1 Whene'er I take my walks abroad,
How many poor I see?
What shall I render to my God
For all his gifts to me?

2 Not more than others I deserve,
Yet God hath given me more;
For I have food, while others starve,
Or beg from door to door.

3 How many children in the street
Half naked I behold?
While I am clothed from head to feet,
And cover'd from the cold.

4 While some poor wretches scarce can tell
Where they may lay their head,
I have a home wherein to dwell,
And rest upon my bed.

5 While others early learn to swear,
And curse, and lie, and steal,
Lord, I am taught thy name to fear,
And do thy holy will.

6 Are these thy favours, day by day
To me above the rest?
Then let me love thee more than they,
And try to serve thee best.


Song 5.
_Praise for Birth and Education in a Christian Land_.

1 Great God, to thee my voice I raise,
To thee my youngest hours belong;
I would begin my life with praise,
Till growing years improve the song.

2 'Tis to thy soveraign grace I owe,
That I was born on Brittish ground,
Where streams of heavenly mercy flow,
And words of sweet salvation sound.

3 I would not change my native land
For rich Peru, with all her gold:
A nobler prize lies in my hand
Than East or Western Indies hold.

4 How do I pity those that dwell
Where ignorance and darkness reigns;
They know no heav'n, they fear no hell,
Those endless joys, those endless pains.

5 Thy glorious promises, O Lord,
Kindle my hope and my desire;
While all the preachers of thy word
Warn me t' escape eternal fire.

6 Thy praise shall still employ my breath,
Since thou hast mark'd my way to heaven;
Nor will I run the road to death,
And wast the blessings thou hast given.


Song 6.
_Praise for the Gospel_.

1 Lord, I ascribe it to thy grace,
And not to chance as others do,
That I was born of Christian race,
And not a Heathen, or a Jew.

2 What would the ancient Jewish kings,
And Jewish prophets once have given,
Could they have heard these glorious things,
Which Christ reveal'd, and brought from heav'n!

3 How glad the Heathens would have been,
That worship idols, wood, and stone,
If they the book of God had seen,
Or Jesus and his gospel known!

4 Then if the Gospel I refuse,
How shall I e'er lift up mine eyes?
For all the Gentiles and the Jews
Against me will in judgment rise.


Song 7.
_The Excellency of the Bible_.

1 Great God, with wonder and with praise,
On all thy works I look;
But still thy wisdom, power and grace
Shine brighter in thy Book.

2 The stars that in their courses roll,
Have much instruction given;
But thy good Word informs my soul
How I may climb to heaven.

3 The fields provide me food, and show
The goodness of the Lord;
But fruits of life and glory grow
In thy most holy Word.

4 Here are my choicest treasures hid,
Here my best comfort lies;
Here my desires are satisfy'd;
And hence my hopes arise.

5 Lord, make me understand thy law,
Show what my faults have been;
And from thy Gospel let me draw
Pardon for all my sin.

6 Here would I learn how Christ has dy'd
To save my soul from hell:
Not all the books on earth beside
Such heav'nly wonders tell.

7 Then let me love my Bible more,
And take a fresh delight
By day to read these wonders o'er,
And meditate by night.


Song 8.
_Praise to God for learning to read_.

1 The praises of my tongue
I offer to the Lord,
That I was taught, and learnt so young
To read his holy Word.

2 That I am taught to know
The danger I was in,
By nature and by practice too
A wretched slave to sin.

3 That I am led to see
I can do nothing well;
And whither shall a sinner flee,
To save himself from hell?

4 Dear Lord, this book of thine
Informs me where to go
For grace to pardon all my sin,
And make me holy too.

5 Here I can read and learn
How Christ the Son of God
Did undertake our great concern,
Our ransom cost his blood.

6 And now he reigns above,
He sends his Spirit down,
To show the wonders of his love,
And make his Gospel known.

7 O may that Spirit teach,
And make my heart receive
Those truths which all thy servants preach,
And all thy saints believe!

8 Then shall I praise the Lord
In a more chearful strain,
That I was taught to read his Word,
And have not learnt in vain.


Song 9.
The All-Seeing God.

1 Almighty God, thy piercing eye
Strikes through the shades of night,
And our most secret actions lie
All open to thy sight.

2 There's not a sin that we commit,
Nor wicked word we say,
But in thy dreadful book `tis writ
Against the judgment-day.

3 And must the crimes that I have done
Be read and publish'd there,
Be all exposed before the sun,
While men and angels hear?

4 Lord, at thy feet ashamed I lie,
Upward I dare not look;
Pardon my sins before I die,
And blot them from thy book.

5 Remember all the dying pains
That my Redeemer felt,
And let his blood wash out my stains,
And answer for my guilt.

6 O may I now for ever fear
T' indulge a sinful thought,
Since the great God can see, and hear,
And writes down every fault!


Song 10.
_Solemn Thoughts of God and Death_.

1 There is a God that reigns above,
Lord of the heavens, and earth, and seas:
I fear his wrath, I ask his love,
And with my lips I sing his praise.

2 There is a law which he has writ,
To teach us all what we must do;
My soul, to his commands submit,
For they are holy, just and true.

3 There is a Gospel of rich grace,
Whence sinners all their comfort draw;
Lord, I repent, and seek thy face;
For I have often broke thy law.

4 There is an hour when I must die,
Nor do I know how soon `twill come;
A thousand children young as I
Are call'd by death to hear their doom.

5 Let me improve the hours I have
Before the day of grace is fled;
There's no repentance in the grave,
No pardons offer'd to the dead.

6 Just as a tree cut down, that fell
To north, or southward, there it lies:
So man departs to heaven or hell,
Fix'd in the state wherein he dies.


Song 11.
_Heaven and Hell_.

1 There is beyond the sky
A heaven of joy and love,
And holy children, when they die,
Go to that world above.

2 There is a dreadful hell,
And everlasting pains,
There sinners must with devils dwell
In darkness, fire, and chains.

3 Can such a wretch as I
Escape this cursed end?
And may I hope, whene'er I die,
I shall to heaven ascend?

4 Then will I read and pray
While I have life and breath;
Lest I should be cut off to day,
And sent t' eternal death.


Song 12.
_The Advantages of early Religion_.

1 Happy's the child whose youngest years
Receive instruction well;
Who hates the sinner's path, and fears
The road that leads to hell.

2 When we devote our youth to God,
'Tis pleasing in his eyes;
A flower, when offer'd in the bud,
Is no vain sacrifice.

3 'Tis easier work if we begin
To fear the Lord betimes;
While sinners that grow old in sin
Are hard'ned in their crimes.

4 'Twill save us from a thousand snares
To mind religion young;
Grace will preserve our following years
And make our vertue strong.

5 To thee, Almighty God, to thee
Our childhood we resign;
'Twill please us to look back and see
That our whole lives were thine.

6 Let the sweet work of prayer and praise,
Employ my youngest breath;
Thus I'm prepar'd for longer days,
Or fit for early death.


Song 13.
_The Danger of Delay_.

1 Why should I say, "`Tis yet too soon
"To seek for heaven or think of death?"
A flower may fade before `tis noon,
And I this day may lose my breath.

2 If this rebellious heart of mine,
Despise the gracious calls of Heaven;
I may be hard'ned in my sin,
And never have repentance given.

3 What if the Lord grow wroth, and swear
While I refuse to read and pray,
That he'll refuse to lend an ear,
To all my groans another day?

4 What if his dreadful anger burn,
While I refuse his offer'd grace,
And all his love to fury turn,
And strike me dead upon the place?

5 'Tis dangerous to provoke a God;
His power and vengeance none can tell:
One stroke of his almighty rod
Shall send young sinners quick to hell.

6 Then `twill for ever be in vain
To cry for pardon or for grace,
To wish I had my time again,
Or hope to see my Maker's face.


Song 14.
_Examples of early piety_.

1 What blest examples do I find
Writ in the Word of Truth,
Of children that began to mind
Religion in their youth.

2 Jesus, who reigns above the skie,
And keeps the world in awe;
Was once a child as young as I,
And kept his Father's law.

3 At twelve years old he talk'd with men,
(The Jews all wondering stand;)
Yet he obey'd his Mother then,
And came at her command.

4 Children a sweet hosanna sung,
And blest their Saviour's name;
They gave him honour with their tongue
While scribes and priests blaspheme.

5 Samuel the child was wean'd, and brought
To wait upon the Lord;
Young Timothy betimes was taught
To know his holy Word.

6 Then why should I so long delay
What others learn so soon?
I would not pass another day
Without this work begun.


Song 15.
_Against Lying_.

1 O `tis a lovely thing for youth
To walk betimes in wisdom's way;
To fear a lye, to speak the truth,
That we may trust to all they say.

2 But lyars we can never trust,
Though they should speak the thing that's true,
And he that does one fault at first,
And lyes to hide it, makes it two.

3 Have we not known, nor heard, nor read,
How God abhors deceit and wrong?
How Ananias was struck dead
Catch'd with a lye upon his tongue?

4 So did his wife Sapphira die
When she came in, and grew so bold
As to confirm that wicked lye
That just before her husband told.

5 The Lord delights in them that speak
The words of truth; but every lyar
Must have his portion in the lake
That burns with brimstone and with fire.

6 Then let me always watch my lips,
Lest I be struck to death and hell,
Since God a book of reckoning keeps
For every lye that children tell.


Song 16.
_Against Quarrelling and Fighting_.

1 Let dogs delight to bark and bite,
For God has made them so;
Let bears and lyons growl and fight,
For `tis their nature too.

2 But, children, you should never let
Such angry passions rise;
Your little hands were never made
To tear each other's eyes.

3 Let love thro' all your actions run,
And all your words be mild;
Live like the blessed Virgin's Son,
That sweet and lovely child.

4 His soul was gentle as a lamb;
And as his stature grew,
He grew in favour both with man
And God his Father too.

5 Now, Lord of all, he reigns above,
And from his heavenly throne,
He sees what children dwell in love,
And marks them for his own.


Song 17.
_Love between Brothers and Sisters_.

1 What ever brawls are in the street
There should be peace at home;
Where sisters dwell and brothers meet
Quarrels shou'd never come.

2 Birds in their little nests agree;
And `tis a shameful sight,
When children of one family
Fall out, and chide, and fight.

3 Hard names at first, and threatening words,
That are but noisy breath,
May grow to clubs and naked swords,
To murder and to death.

4 The devil tempts one mother's son
To rage against another:
So wicked Cain was hurried on,
Till he had kill'd his brother.

5 The wise will make their anger cool
At least before `tis night;
But in the bosom of a fool
It burns till morning light.

5 Pardon, O Lord, our childish rage;
Our little brawls remove;
That as we grow to riper age,
Our hearts may all be love.


Song 18.
_Against Scoffing and calling Names_.

1 Our tongues were made to bless the Lord,
And not speak ill of men:
When others give a railing word,
We must not rail again.

2 Cross words and angry names require
To be chastiz'd at school;
And he's in danger of hell-fire,
That calls his brother, fool.

3 But lips that dare be so prophane
To mock and jeer and scoff
At holy things, or holy men,
The Lord shall cut them off.

4 When children, in their wanton play
Served old Elisha so,
And bade the prophet go his way,
"Go up, thou bald head, go."

5 God quickly stopt their wicked breath,
And sent two raging bears,
That tore them limb from limb to death,
With blood and groans and tears.

6 Great God, how terrible art thou
To sinners ne'er so young!
Grant me thy grace and teach me how
To tame and rule my tongue.


Song 19.
_Against Swearing and Cursing, and taking God's Name in vain_.

1 Angels that high in glory dwell
Adore thy Name, Almighty God!
And devils tremble down in hell
Beneath the terrors of thy rod.

2 And yet how wicked children dare
Abuse thy dreadful glorious Name!
And when they're angry, how they swear,
And curse their fellows, and blaspheme!

3 How will they stand before thy face,
Who treated thee with such disdain,
While thou shalt doom them to the place
Of everlasting fire and pain?

4 Then never shall one cooling drop
To quench their burning tongues be giv'n.
But I will praise thee here, and hope
Thus to employ my tongue in heav'n.

5 My heart shall be in pain to hear
Wretches affront the Lord above;
'Tis that great God whose power I fear,
That heavenly Father whom I love.

6 If my companions grow profane,
I'll leave their friendship when I hear
Young sinners take thy name in vain,
And learn to curse, and learn to swear.


Song 20.
_Against Idleness and Mischief_.

1 How doth the little busy bee
Improve each shining hour,
And gather honey all the day
From every opening flower!

2 How skilfully she builds her cell!
How neat she spreads the wax!
And labours hard to store it well
With the sweet food she makes.

3 In works of labour or of skill
I would be busy too:
For Satan finds some mischief still
For idle hands to do.

4 In books, or work, or healthful play
Let my first years be past,
That I may give for every day
Some good account at last.


Song 21.
_Against evil Company_.

1 Why should I join with those in play
In whom I've no delight;
Who curse and swear, but never play;
Who call ill names, and fight?

2 I hate to hear a wanton song:
Their words offend my ears:
I should not dare defile my tongue
With language such as theirs.

3 Away from fools I'll turn my eyes,
Nor with the scoffers go:
I would be walking with the wise,
That wiser I may grow.

4 From one rude boy, that's used to mock,
They learn the wicked jest:
One sickly sheep infects the flock,
And poisons all the rest.

5 My God, I hate to walk or dwell
With sinful children here:
Then let me not be sent to hell,
Where none but sinners are.


Song 22.
_Against Pride in Clothes_.

1 Why should our garments, made to hide
Our parents' shame, provoke our pride?
The art of dress did ne'er begin
Till Eve our mother learnt to sin.

2 When first she put the covering on,
Her robe of innocence was gone;
And yet her children vainly boast
In the sad marks of glory lost.

3 How proud we are! how fond to shew
Our clothes, and call them rich and new,
When the poor sheep and silkworms wore
That very clothing long before!

4 The tulip and the butterfly
Appear in gayer coats than I:
Let me be dress'd fine as I will,
Flies, worms, and flowers exceed me still.

5 Then will I set my heart to find
Inward adornings of the mind:
Knowledge and virtue, truth and grace,
These are the robes of richest dress.

6 No more shall worms with me compare,
This is the raiment angels wear:
The Son of God, when here below,
Put on this blest apparel too.

6 It never fades, it ne'er grows old,
Nor fears the rain, nor moth, nor mould:
It takes no spot, but still refines;
The more `tis worn, the more it shines.

7 In this on earth would I appear,
Then go to heaven, and wear it there:
God will approve it in his sight;
'Tis his own work, and his delight.


Song 23.
_Obedience to Parents_.

1 Let children that would fear the Lord
Hear what their teachers say;
With reverence meet their parents' word,
And with delight obey.

2 Have you not heard what dreadful plagues
Are threaten'd by the Lord,
To him that breaks his father's law,
Or mocks his mother's word?

3 What heavy guilt upon him lies!
How cursed is his name!
The ravens shall pick out his eyes,
And eagles eat the same.

4 But those who worship God, and give
Their parents honour due,
Here on this earth they long shall live,
And live hereafter, too.


Song 24.
_The Child's Complaint_.

1 Why should I love my sports so well,
So constant at my play,
And lose the thoughts of heaven and hell,
And then forget to pray?

2 What do I read my Bible for,
But, Lord, to learn thy will?
And shall I daily know thee more,
And less obey thee still?

3 How senseless is my heart, and wild!
How vain are all my thoughts!
Pity the weakness of a child,
And pardon all my faults.

4 Make me thy heavenly voice to hear,
And let me love to pray;
Since God will lend a gracious ear
To what a child can say.


Song 25.
_A Morning Song_.

1 My God, who makes the sun to know
His proper hour to rise;
And, to give light to all below,
Doth send him round the skies:

2 When from the chambers of the east
His morning race begins,
He never tires, nor stops to rest,
But round the world he shines.

3 So, like the sun, would I fulfil
The business of the day;
Begin my work betimes, and still
March on my heavenly way.

4 Give me, O Lord, thy early grace,
Nor let my soul complain
That the young morning of my day
Has all been spent in vain!


Song 26.
_An Evening Song_.

1 And now another day is gone,
I'll sing my Maker's praise!
My comforts every hour make known
His providence and grace.

2 But how my childhood runs to waste
My sins how great their sum!
Lord, give me pardon for the past,
And strength for days to come.

3 I lay my body down to sleep,
Let angels guard my head;
And, through the hours of darkness, keep
Their watch around my head.

4 With cheerful heart I close mine eyes,
Since thou wilt not remove;
And in the morning let me rise
Rejoicing in thy love.


Song 27.
_For the Lord's Day Morning_.

1 This is the day when Christ arose
So early from the dead:
Why should I my eyelids close,
And waste my hours in bed?

2 This is the day when Jesus broke
The powers of death and hell;
And shall I still wear Satan's yoke,
And love my sins so well?

3 To-day, with pleasure, Christians meet,
To pray, and hear thy Word;
And I would go with cheerful feet
To learn thy will, O Lord!

4 I'll leave my sport, to read and pray,
And so prepare for heaven:
O may I love this blessed day
The best of all the seven!


Song 28.
_For Lord's Day Evening_.

1 Lord, how delightful `tis to see
A whole assembly worship thee!
At once they sing, at once they pray;
They hear of heaven, and learn the way.

2 I have been there, and still would go
'Tis like a little heaven below!
Not all my pleasure and my play
Should tempt me to forget this day.

3 O write upon my memory, Lord,
The text and doctrines of thy Word,
That I may break thy laws no more,
But love thee better than before!

4 With thoughts of Christ and things divine
Fill up this foolish heart of mine:
That, hoping pardon through his blood,
I may lie down, and wake with God.


The TEN COMMANDMENTS out of the Old Testament put into short
Rhime for Children.

Exod. 20.

1. Thou shalt have no more Gods but me.
2. Before no idol bow thy knee.
3. Take not the Name of God in vain:
4. Nor dare the Sabbath Day profane.
5. Give both thy parents honour due.
6. Take heed that thou no murder do.
7. Abstain from words and deeds unclean:
8. Nor steal, though thou art poor and mean.
9. Nor make a wilful lie, nor love it.
10. What is thy neighbour's, dare not covet.


The Sum of the Commandments out of the New Testament.

Matt. 22. 37.

With all thy Soul love God above;
And as thyself thy Neighbour love.


Our Saviour's Golden Rule.

Matt. 7. 12.

Be you to others Kind and True,
As you'd have others be to you.
And neither do nor say to Men
Whate'er you would not take again.


Duty to God and our neighbour.

Love God with all your Soul and Strength.
With all your Heart and Mind;
And love your Neighbour as your self:
Be faithful, just, and kind.

Deal with another as you'd have
Another deal with you.
What you're unwilling to receive,
Be sure you never do.


Out of my Book of _Hymns_, I have here added, the _Hosanna_ and
_Glory to the Father_, &c. to be sung at the end of any of these
Songs, according to the Direction of Parents or Governors.


The _Hosanna_; or Salvation ascribed to Christ.

Long Metre.

1 _Hosanna_ to king _David's_ Son,
Who reigns on a superior Throne;
We bless the Prince of Heav'nly Birth,
Who brings Salvation down to Earth.

2 Let every nation, every age,
In this delightful work engage;
Old Men and Babes in _Sion_ sing
The growing glories of her King!


Common Metre.

1 _Hosanna_ to the Prince of Grace;
_Sion_ behold thy King;
Proclaim the Son of _David's_ Race,
And teach the Babes to sing.

2 _Hosanna_ to th' Eternal Word,
Who from the Father came;
Ascribe Salvation to the Lord,
With Blessings on his Name!


Short Metre.

1 _Hosanna_ to the Son
Of _David_ and of God,
Who brought the News of Pardon down,
And bought it with his Blood.

2 To Christ, th' anointed King,
Be endless blessings giv'n,
Let the whole Earth his Glory sing
Who made our Peace with Heav'n.


Glory to the Father and the Son, &c.

Long Metre.

To God the Father, God the Son,
And God the Spirit, Three in One,
Be Honour, Praise, and Glory giv'n,
By all on Earth, and all in Heav'n.


Common Metre.

Now let the Father and the Son,
And Spirit be ador'd,
Where there are works to make him known,
Or saints to love the Lord.


Short Metre.

Give to the Father Praise,
Give Glory to the Son,
And to the Spirit of his Grace
Be equal Honour done.




A Slight SPECIMEN of MORAL SONGS,

_Such as I wish some happy and condescending Genius would undertake
for the use of Children, and perform much better_.

The sense and subjects might be borrow'd plentifully from the
_Proverbs of Solomon_, from all the common appearances of nature,
from all the occurrences in the civil life, both in city and country:
(which would also afford matter for other divine songs). Here the
language and measures should be easy and flowing with cheerfulness,
and without the solemnities of religion, or the sacred names
of God and holy things; that children might find delight and profit
together.

This would be one effectual way to deliver them from the temptation
of loving and learning those idle, wanton or profane songs, which
give so early an ill taint to the fancy and memory, and become
the seeds of future vices.


_The Sluggard_.

1 'Tis the voice of the Sluggard. I heard him complain
"You have waked me too soon! I must slumber again!"
As the door on its hinges, so he on his bed,
Turns his sides, and his shoulders, and his heavy head.

2 "A little more sleep, and a little more slumber;"
Thus he wastes half his days, and his hours without number:
And when he gets up, he sits folding his hands
Or walks about sauntering, or trifling he stands.

3 I past by his garden, and saw the wild bryar
The thorn and the thistle grow broader and higher:
The clothes that hang on him are turning to rags;
And his money still wasts, still he starves, or he begs.

4 I made him a visit, still hoping to find
He had took better care for improving his mind:
He told me his dreams, talk'd of eating and drinking,
But he scarce reads his Bible, and never loves thinking.

5 Said I then to my heart, "Here's a lesson for me,"
That man's but a picture of what I might be:
But thanks to my friends for their care in my breeding:
Who taught me betimes to love working and reading!


_Innocent Play_.

1 Abroad in the meadows to see the young lambs,
Run sporting about by the side of their dams
With fleeces so clean, and so white;
Or a nest of young doves in a large open cage,
When they play all in love without anger or rage,
How much may we learn from the sight!

2 If we had been ducks, we might dabble in mud:
Or dogs, we might play till it ended in blood;
So foul, or so fierce are their natures.
But Thomas and William, and such pretty names,
Should be cleanly and harmless as doves, or as lambs,
Those lovely sweet innocent creatures.

3 Not a thing that we do, nor a word that we say,
Should injure another in jesting or play;
For he's still in earnest that's hurt.
How rude are the boys that throw pebbles and mire!
There's none but a mad-man will fling about fire,
And tell you, "`Tis all but in sport."


The End.


The TABLE.

 1. A General Song of Praise to God.
 2. Praise for Creation and Providence.
 3. Praise to God for our Redemption.
 4. Praise for mercies Spiritual and Temporal.
 5. Praise for Birth and Education in a Christian Land.
 6. Praise for the Gospel.
 7. The Excellency of the Bible.
 8. Praise to God for learning to read.
 9. The All-seeing God.
10. Solemn Thoughts of God and Death.
11. Heaven and Hell.
12. The Advantages of early Religion.
13. The Danger of Delays.
14. Examples of early Piety.
15. Against lying.
16. Against Quarrelling and Fighting.
17. Love between Brothers and Sisters.
18. Against scoffing and calling Names.
19. Against swearing and cursing, and taking God's Name in vain.
20. Against Idleness and Mischief.
21. Against Evil Company.
22. Against Pride in Clothes.
23. Obedience to Parents.
24. The Child's Complaint.
25. A Morning Song.
26. An Evening Song.
27. An Hymn for the Lord's Day Morning.
28. An Hymn for the Lord's Day Evening.
    The Ten Commandments.
    The Sum of the Commandments.
    Our Saviour's Golden Rule.
    Duty to God and our Neighbour.
    The Hosanna in Long Metre.
                in Common Metre.
                in Short Metre.
    Glory to the Father in Long Metre.
                        in Common Metre.
                        in Short Metre.

A slight Specimen of Moral Songs, viz.
    The Sluggard.
    Innocent Play.


    The End of the Table.



ADDENDUM to the Moral Songs.


Transcriber's Note.

In the 1715 edition, for the reasons explained by Watts in his
Preface, there are only two moral songs, namely "The Sluggard" and
"Innocent Play." Those added later are included in this Addendum.
The texts are from an 1866 printing in New York, posted into the
public domain by the Christian Classics Ethereal Library (CCEL) at

http://www.ccel.org/ccel/watts/divsongs.html



Song 3.
The Rose.
12,8,12,8

How fair is the Rose! what a beautiful flower!
The glory of April and May:
But the leaves are beginning to fade in an hour,
And they wither and die in a day.

Yet the Rose has one powerful virtue to boast,
Above all the flowers of the field!
When its leaves are all dead and fine colours are lost,
Still how sweet a perfume it will yield!

So frail is the youth and the beauty of man,
Though they bloom and look gay like the Rose;
But all our fond care to preserve them is vain,
Time kills them as fast as he goes.

Then I'll not be proud of my youth and my beauty,
Since both of them wither and fade;
But gain a good name by well doing my duty:
This will scent like a Rose when I'm dead.


Song 4.
The thief
8,7,8,7

Why should I deprive my neighbour
Of his goods against his will?
Hands were made for honest labour,
Not to plunder, or to steal.

'Tis a foolish self-deceiving
By such tricks to hope for gain:

All that's ever got by thieving
Turns to sorrow, shame, and pain.

Have not Eve and Adam taught us
Their sad profit to compute,
To what dismal state they brought us
When they stole forbidden fruit?

Oft we see a young beginner
Practice little pilfering ways,
Till grown up a harden'd sinner,
Then the gallows ends his days.

Theft will not be always hidden,
Though we fancy none can spy:
When we take a thing forbidden,
God beholds it with his eye.

Guard my heart, O God of heaven,
Lest I covet what's not mine;
Lest I steal what is not given,
Guard my heart and hands from sin.


Song 5.
The ant, or emmet.
11,11,8,11,11,8

These Emmets, how little they are in our eyes!
We tread them to dust, and a troop of them dies,
Without our regard or concern:
Yet, as wise as we are, if we went to their school,
There's many a sluggard and many a fool
Some lessons of wisdom might learn.

They wear not their time out in sleeping or play,
But gather up corn in a sunshiny day,
And for winter they lay up their stores:
They manage their work in such regular forms,
One would think they foresaw all the frosts and the storms,
And so brought their food withindoors.

But I have less sense than a poor creeping Ant,
If I take not due care for the things I shall want,
Nor provide against dangers in time;
When death or old age shall once stare in my face,
What a wretch shall I be in the end of my days,
If I trifle away all their prime!

Now, now, while my strength and my youth are in bloom,
Let me think what shall serve me when sickness shall come,
And pray that my sins be forgiven.
Let me read in good books, and believe, and obey;
That, when death turns me out of this cottage of clay,
I may dwell in a palace in heaven.


Song 6.
Good resolutions.
7,8,7,8

Though I'm now in younger days,
Nor can tell what shall befall me,
I'll prepare for every place
Where my growing age shall call me.

Should I e'er be rich or great,
Others shall partake my goodness:
I'll supply the poor with meat,
Never showing scorn or rudeness.

Where I see the blind or lame,
Deaf or dumb, I'll kindly treat them:
I deserve to feel the same,
If I mock, or hurt, or cheat them.

If I meet with railing tongues,
Why should I return them railing,
Since I best revenge my wrongs
By my patience never failing?

When I hear them telling lies,
Talking foolish, cursing, swearing,
First I'll try to make them wise,
Or I'll soon go out of hearing.

What though I be low or mean,
I'll engage the rich to love me,
While I'm modest, neat, and clean,
And submit when they reprove me.

If I should be poor and sick,
I shall meet, I hope, with pity;
Since I love to help the weak,
Though they're neither fair nor witty.

I'll not willingly offend,
Nor be easily offended:
What's amiss I'll strive to mend,
And endure what can't be mended.

May I be so watchful still
O'er my humours and my passion,
As to speak and do no ill,
Though it should be all the fashion.

Wicked fashions lead to hell;
Ne'er may I be found complying;
But in life behave so well,
Not to be afraid of dying.


Song 7.
Summer's evening.
11,11,11,9

How fine has the day been! how bright was the sun!
How lovely and joyful the course that he run;
Though he rose in a mist when his race he begun,
And there followed some droppings of rain:
But now the fair traveller's come to the west,
His rays are all gold, and his beauties are best;
He paints the skies gay as he sinks to his rest,
And foretells a bright rising again.

Just such is the Christian. His course he begins
Like the sun in a mist, while he mourns for his sins,
And melts into tears! then he breaks out and shines,
And travels his heavenly way:
But when he comes nearer to finish his race,
Like a fine setting sun, he looks richer in grace;
And gives a sure hope, at the end of his days,
Of rising in brighter array.


Song 8.
Cradle hymn.
8,7,8,7

Hush, my dear! Lie still, and slumber!
Holy angels guard thy bed!
Heavenly blessings, without number,
Gently falling on thy head.

Sleep, my babe! thy food and raiment,
House and home, thy friends provide;
All without thy care or payment,
All thy wants are well supplied.

How much better thou'rt attended
Than the Son of God could be,
When from heaven he descended,
And became a child like thee!

Soft and easy is thy cradle:
Coarse and hard thy Saviour lay,
When his birthplace was a stable,
And his softest bed was hay.

Blessed Babe! what glorious features,--
Spotless fair, divinely bright!
Must he dwell with brutal creatures?
How could angels bear the sight?

Was there nothing but a manger
Cursed sinners could afford,
To receive the heavenly stranger?
Did they thus affront the Lord?

Soft, my child! I did not chide thee,
Though my song might sound too hard:
'Tis thy mother sits beside thee,
And her arm shall be thy guard.

Yet to read the shameful story.
How the Jews received their King,
How they served the Lord of Glory,
Makes me angry while I sing.

See the kinder shepherds round him,
Telling wonders from the sky!
Where hey sought him, there they found him,
With his Virgin-mother by.

See the lovely Babe a-dressing:
Lovely infant, how he smiled!
When he wept, his mother's blessing
Sooth'd and hush'd the holy Child.

Lo, he slumbers in a manger,
Where the horned oxen fed!--
Peace, my darling, here's no danger:
There's no ox a-near thy bed.

'Twas so save thee, child, from dying,
Save my dear from burning flame,
Bitter groans and endless crying,
That thy blest Redeemer came.

May'st thou live to know and fear him,
Trust and love him all thy days,
Then go dwell for ever near him:
See his face, and sing his praise!

I could give thee thousand kisses!
Hoping what I most desire,
Not a mother's fondest wishes
Can to greater joys aspire!






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Divine Songs, by Isaac Watts

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIVINE SONGS ***

***** This file should be named 13439.txt or 13439.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/4/3/13439/

Produced by Lewis Jones

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
