Project Gutenberg's Rudimental Divine Science, by Mary Baker G. Eddy

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Rudimental Divine Science

Author: Mary Baker G. Eddy

Release Date: October 30, 2006 [EBook #19666]
Updated: June 24, 2017

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RUDIMENTAL DIVINE SCIENCE ***




Produced by Michael Gray




RUDIMENTAL DIVINE
SCIENCE



RUDIMENTAL
DIVINE SCIENCE

BY

MARY BAKER EDDY
AUTHOR OF SCIENCE AND HEALTH WITH KEY TO
THE SCRIPTURES


[Image: Publishing Company Logo]
Registered
U. S. Patent Office


Published by The
Trustees under the Will of Mary Baker G. Eddy
BOSTON, U.S.A.

Authorized Literature of
THE FIRST CHURCH OF CHRIST, SCIENTIST
In Boston, Massachusetts


_Copyright, 1891, 1908_
BY MARY BAKER G. EDDY
Copyright renewed 1919
---
All rights reserved

---
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA


THIS LITTLE BOOK
IS
TENDERLY AND RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED
TO ALL
LOYAL STUDENTS, WORKING AND WAITING
FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE
SCIENCE OF MIND-HEALING
                MARY BAKER EDDY

CONTENTS

DEFINITION OF CHRISTIAN SCIENCE
PRINCIPLE OF CHRISTIAN SCIENCE
PERSONALITY OF GOD
HEALING SICKNESS AND SIN
INDIVIDUALITY OF GOD
MATERIAL AND SPIRITUAL SCIENCE
NON-EXISTENCE OF MATTER
MATERIALITY INTANGIBLE
BASIS OF MIND-HEALING
MATERIAL AND SPIRITUAL MAN
DEMONSTRATION IN HEALING
MEANS AND METHODS
ONLY ONE SCHOOL


RUDIMENTAL DIVINE
SCIENCE

_How would you define Christian Science?_                       1

AS the law of God, the law of good, interpreting and
demonstrating the divine Principle and rule of                  3
universal harmony.

_What is the Principle of Christian Science?_

It is God, the Supreme Being, infinite and immortal             6
Mind, the Soul of man and the universe. It is our Father
which is in heaven.  It is substance, Spirit, Life, Truth,
and Love, -- these are the deific Principle.                    9

_Do you mean by this that God is a person?_

The word person affords a large margin for misappre-
hension, as well as definition.  In French the equivalent       12
word is _personne_.  In Spanish, Italian, and Latin, it is
_persona_.   The Latin verb _personare_ is compounded of
the prefix _per_ (through) and _sonare_ (to sound).             15

In law, Blackstone applies the word _personal_ to _bodily
presence_, in distinction from one's appearance (in court,
for example) by deputy or proxy.                                18

Other definitions of _person_, as give by Webster, are          1
"a living soul; a self-conscious being; a moral agent;
especially, a living human being, a corporeal man, woman,       3
or child; an individual of the human race." He adds,
that among Trinitarian Christians the word stands for one
of the three subjects, or agents, constituting the Godhead.     6

In Christian Science we learn that God is definitely indi-
vidual and not a _person_, as that word is used by the best
authorities, if our lexicographers are right in defining        9
_person_ as especially a finite _human being_; but God is
personal, if by _person_ is meant infinite Spirit.

We do not conceive rightly of God, if we think of Him           12
as less than infinite.  The human person is finite; and
therefore I prefer to retain the proper sense of Diety by
using the phrase _an individual_ God rather than _a per-        15
sonal_ God; for there is and can be but on infinite indi-
vidual spirit, who mortals have named God.

Science defines the individuality of God as supreme             18
good, Life, Truth, Love.  This term enlarges our sense
of Diety, takes away the trammels assigned to God by
finite though, and introduces us to higher definitions.         21

_Is healing the sick the whole of Science?_

Healing physical sickness is the smallest part of Chris-
tian Science.  It is only the bugle-call to thought and         24
action, in the higher range of infinite goodness.  The
emphatic purpose of Christian Science is the healing of
sin; and this task, sometimes, may be harder than the           27
cure of disease; because, while mortals love to sin, they       1
do not love to be sick.  Hence their comparative acqui-
escence in your endeavors to heal them of bodily ills, and      3
their obstinate resistance to all efforts to save them from
sin through Christ, spiritual Truth and Love, which
redeem them, and become their Saviour, through the              6
flesh, from the flesh, -- the material world and evil.

This Life, Truth, and Love -- this trinity of good -- was
individualized, to the perception of mortal sense, in the       9
man Jesus.  His history is emphatic in our hearts, and it
lives more because of his spiritual than his physical healing.
His example is, to Christian Scientists, what the models        12
of the masters in music and painting are to artists.

Genuine Christian Scientists will no more deviate mor-
ally from that divine digest of Science called the Sermon       15
on the Mount, than they will manipulate invalids, prescribe
drugs, or deny God.  Jesus' healing was spiritual in its
nature, method, and design.  He wrought the cure of             18
disease through the divine Mind, which gives all true
volition, impulse, and action; and destroys the mental
error made manifest physically, and establishes the oppo-       21
site manifestation of Truth upon the body in harmony
and health.

_By the individuality of God, do you mean that God has_          24
_a finite form?_

No.  I mean the infinite and divine Principle of all
being, the ever-present I AM, filling all space, including      27
in itself all Mind, the one Father-Mother God.  Life,           1
Truth, and Love are this trinity in unity, and their uni-
verse is spiritual, peopled with perfect beings, harmonious     3
and eternal, of which our material universe and men are
the counterfeits.

_Is God the Principle of all science, or only of Divine or_     6
_Christian Science?_

Science is Mind manifested.  It is not material; neither
is it of human origin.                                          9

All true Science represents a moral and spiritual force,
which holds the earth in its orbit.  This force is Spirit,
that can "bind the sweet influences of the Pleiades," and       12
"loose the bands of Orion."

There is no material science, if by that term you mean
material intelligence.  God is infinite Mind, hence there       15
is no other Mind.  Good is Mind, but evil is not Mind.
Good is not in evil, but in God only. Spirit is not in matter,
but in Spirit only. Law is not in matter, but in Mind only.     18

_Is there no matter?_

All is Mind.  According to the Scriptures and Christian
Science, all is God, and there is naught beside Him.  "God      21
is Spirit;" and we can only learn and love Him through
His spirit, which brings out the fruits of Spirit and ex-
tinguishes forever the works of darkness by His marvel-         24
lous light.

The five material senses testify to the existence of
matter.  The spiritual senses afford no such evidence,          1
but deny the testimony of the material senses.  Which
testimony is correct?  The Bible says: "Let God be              3
true, and every man a liar."  If, as the Scriptures imply,
God is All-in-all, then all must be Mind, since God is
Mind.  Therefore in divine Science there is no material         6
mortal man, for man is spiritual and eternal, he being
made in the image of Spirit, or God.

There is no material sense.  Matter is inert, inanimate,        9
and sensationless, -- considered apart from Mind.  Lives
there a man who has ever found Soul in the body or in
matter, who has ever seen spiritual substance with the          12
eye, who has found sight in matter, hearing in the material
ear, or intelligence in non-intelligence?  If there is any
such thing as matter, it must be either mind which is           15
called matter, or matter without Mind.

Matter without Mind is a moral impossibility.  Mind
in matter is pantheism.  Soul is the only real conscious-       18
ness which cognizes being.  The body does not see, hear,
smell, or taste.  Human belief says that it does; but
destroy this belief of seeing with the eye, and we could        21
not see materially; and so it is with each of the physical
senses.

Accepting the verdict of these material senses, we should       24
believe man and the universe to be the football of chance
and sinking into oblivion.   Destroy the five senses as
organized matter, and you must either become non-exist-         27
ent, or exist in Mind only; and this latter conclusion is
the simple solution of the problem of being, and leads to       1
the equal inference that there is no matter.

_The sweet sounds and glories of earth and sky, assum-_         3
_ing manifold forms and colors, -- are they not tangible and_
_material?_

As Mind they are real, but not as matter.  All beauty           6
and goodness are in and of Mind, emanating from God;
but when we change the nature of beauty and goodness
from Mind to matter, the beauty is marred, through a            9
false conception, and, to the material senses, evil takes
the place of good.

Has not the truth in Christian Science met a response           12
from Prof. S. P. Langley, the young American astronomer?
He says that "color is in _us_," not "in the rose;" and he
adds that this is not "any metaphysical subtlety," but a        15
fact "almost universally accepted, within the _last few_
_years_, by physicists."

_Is not the basis of Mind-healing a destruction of the evi-_    18
_dence of the material senses, and restoration of the true_
_evidence of spiritual sense?_

It is, so far as you perceive and understand this predi-        21
cate and postulate of Mind-healing; but the Science of
Mind-healing is best understood in practical demonstra-
tion.  The proof of what you apprehend, in the simplest         24
definite and absolute form of healing, can alone answer
this question of how much you understand of Christian
Science Mind-healing.   Not that all healing is Science,        1
by any means; but that the simplest case, healed in Science,
is as demonstrably scientific, in a small degree, as the most   3
difficult case so treated.

The infinite and subtler conceptions and consistencies
of Christian Science are set forth in my work Science and       6
Health.

_Is man material or spiritual?_

In Science, man is the manifest reflection of God, per-         9
feet and immortal Mind.  He is the likeness of God; and
His likeness would be lost if inverted or perverted.

According to the evidence of the so-called physical             12
senses, man is material, fallen, sick, depraved, mortal.
Science and spiritual sense contradict this, and they afford
the only true evidence of the being of God and man, the         15
material evidence being wholly false.

Jesus said of personal evil, that "the truth abode not
in him," because there is no material sense.  Matter, as        18
matter, has neither sensation nor personal intelligence.
As a pretension to be Mind, matter is a lie, and "the
father of lies;" Mind is not in matter, and Spirit cannot       21
originate its opposite, named matter.

According to divine Science, Spirit no more changes its
species, by evolving matter from Spirit, than natural           24
science, so-called, or material laws, bring about altera-
tion of species by transforming minerals into vegetables
or plants into animals, -- thus confusing and confounding       27
the three great kingdoms.  No rock brings forth an apple;       1
no pine-tree produces a mammal or provides breast-milk
for babes.                                                      3

To sense, the lion of to-day is the lion of six thousand
years ago; but in Science, Spirit sends forth its own harm-
less likeness.                                                  6

_How should I undertake to demonstrate Christian Science_
_in healing the sick?_

As I have given you only an epitome of the Principle,           9
so I can give you here nothing but an outline of the prac-
tice. Be honest, be true to thyself, and true to others;
then it follows thou wilt be strong in God, the eternal         12
good. Heal through Truth and Love; there is no other
healer.

In all moral revolutions, from a lower to a higher con-         15
dition of thought and action, Truth is in the minority and
error has the majority.  It is not otherwise in the field
of Mind-healing.  The man who calls himself a Christian         18
Scientist, yet is false to God and man, is also uttering
falsehood about good.  This falsity shuts against him the
Truth and the Principle of Science, but opens a way             21
whereby, through will-power, sense may say the unchris-
tian practitioner can heal; but Science shows that he makes
morally worse the invalid whom he is supposed to cure.          24

By this I mean that mortal mind should not be falsely
impregnated.  If by such lower means the health is seem-
ingly restored, the restoration is not lasting, and the patient 27
is liable to a relapse, -- "The last state of that man is       1
worse than the first."

The teacher of Mind-healing who is not a Christian,             3
in the highest sense, is constantly sowing the seeds of
discord and disease.  Even the truth he speaks is more
or less blended with error; and this error will spring up       6
in the mind of his pupil.  The pupil's imperfect knowl-
edge will lead to weakness in practice, and he will be a
poor practitioner, if not a malpractitioner.                    9

The basis of malpractice is in erring human will, and
this will is an outcome of what I call _mortal mind_, -- a
false and temporal sense of Truth, Life, and Love.  To          12
heal, in Christian Science, is to base your practice on
immortal Mind, the divine Principle of man's being; and
this requires a preparation of the heart and an answer          15
of the lips from the Lord.

The Science of healing is the Truth of healing.  If
one is untruthful, his mental state weighs against his          18
healing power; and similar effects come from pride,
envy, lust, and all fleshly vices.

The spiritual power of a scientific, right thought, with-       21
out a direct effort, an audible or even a mental argument,
has oftentimes healed inveterate diseases.

The thoughts of the practitioner should be imbued with          24
a clear conviction of the omnipotence and omnipresence
of God; that He is All, and that there can be none beside
Him; that God is good, and the producer only of good;           27
and hence, that whatever militates against health, har-
mony, or holiness, is an unjust usurper of the throne of        1
the controller of all mankind.  Note this, that if you have
power in error, you forfeit the power that Truth bestows,       3
and its salutary influence on yourself and others.

You must feel and know that God alone governs man;
that His government is harmonious; that He is too pure          6
to behold iniquity, and divides His power with nothing
evil or material; that material laws are only human be-
liefs, which govern mortals wrongfully. These beliefs arise     9
from the subjective states of thought, producing the be-
liefs of a mortal material universe, -- so-called, and of
material disease and mortality.  Mortal ills are but errors     12
of thought, -- diseases of mortal mind, and not of matter;
for matter cannot feel, see, or report pain or disease,

Disease is a thing of thought manifested on the body;           15
and fear is the procurator of the thought which causes
sickness and suffering. Remove this fear by the true
sense that God is Love, -- and that Love punishes nothing       18
but sin, -- and the patient can then look up to the loving
God, and know that He afflicteth not willingly the children
of men, who are punished because of disobedience to His         21
spiritual law.  His law of Truth, when obeyed, removes
every erroneous physical and mental state.  The belief
that matter can master Mind, and make you ill, is an            24
error which Truth will destroy.

You must learn to acknowledge God in all His ways.
It is only a lack of understanding of the allness of God,       27
which leads you to believe in the existence of matter, or
that matter can frame its own conditions, contrary to the       1
law of Spirit.

Sickness is the schoolmaster, leading you to Christ;            3
first to faith in Christ; next to belief in God as omnipo-
tent; and finally to the _understanding_ of God and man
in Christian Science, whereby you learn that God is good,       6
and in Science man is His likeness, the forever reflection of
goodness.  Therefore good is one and All.

This brings forward the next proposition in Christian           9
Science, -- namely, that there are no sickness, sin, and
death in the divine Mind.  What seem to be disease, vice,
and mortality are illusions of the physical senses.  These      12
illusions are not real, but unreal.  Health is the conscious-
ness of the unreality of pain and disease; or, rather, the
absolute consciousness of harmony and of nothing else.          15
In a moment you may awake from a night-dream; just
so you can awake from the dream of sickness; but the
demonstration of the Science of Mind-healing by no means        18
rests on the strength of human belief.  This demonstra-
tion is based on a true understanding of God and divine
Science, which takes away every human belief, and,              21
through the illumination of spiritual understanding, re-
veals the all-power and ever-presence of good, whence
emanate health, harmony, and Life eternal.                      24

The lecturer, teacher, or healer who is indeed a Christian
Scientist, never introduces the subject of human anatomy;
never depicts the muscular, vascular, or nervous opera-         27
tions of the human frame.   He never talks about the
structure of the material body. He never lays his hands         1
on the patient, nor manipulates the parts of the body sup-
posed to be ailing. Above all, he keeps unbroken the Ten        3
Commandments, and practises Christ's Sermon on the
Mount.

Wrong thoughts and methods strengthen the sense of              6
disease, instead of cure it; or else quiet the fear of the
sick on false grounds, encouraging them in the belief of
error until they hold stronger than before the belief that      9
they are first made sick by matter, and then restored
through its agency. This fosters infidelity, and is mental
quackery, that denies the Principle of Mind-healing.  If        12
the sick are aided in this mistaken fashion, their ailments
will return, and be more stubborn because the relief is
unchristian and unscientific.                                   15

Christian Science erases from the minds of invalids
their mistaken belief that they live in or because of matter,
or that a so-called material organism controls the health       18
or existence of mankind, and induces rest in God, divine
Love, as caring for all the conditions requisite for the well-
being of man.  As power divine is the healer, why should        21
mortals concern themselves with the chemistry of food?
Jesus said: "Take no thought what ye shall eat."

The practitioner should also endeavor to free the minds         24
of the healthy from any sense of subordination to their
bodies, and teach them that the divine Mind, not material
law, maintains human health and life.                           27

A Christian Scientist knows that, in Science, disease
is unreal; that Mind is not in matter; that Life is God,        1
good; hence Life is not functional, and is neither matter
nor mortal mind; knows that pantheism and theosophy             3
are not Science.  Whatever saps, with human belief,
this basis of Christian Science, renders it impossible to
demonstrate the Principle of this Science, even in the          6
smallest degree.

A mortal and material body is not the actual individuality
of man made in the divine and spiritual image of God.           9
The material body is not the likeness of Spirit; hence it
is not the truth of being, but the likeness of error ? the
human belief which saith there is more than one God, --         12
there is more than one Life and one Mind.

In Deuteronomy (iv. 35) we read:  "The Lord, He is
God; there is none else beside Him."  In John (iv. 24)          15
we may read: "God is Spirit."  These propositions, un-
derstood in their Science, elucidate my meaning.

When treating a patient, it is not Science to treat every       18
organ in the body.  To aver that harmony is the real and
discord is the unreal, and then give special attention to
what according to their own belief is diseased, is scientific;  21
and if the _healer realizes_ the truth, it will free his patient.

_What are the means and, methods of trustworthy Christian_
_Scientists?_                                                   24

These people should not be expected, more than others,
to give all their time to Christian Science work, receiving
no wages in return, but left to be fed, clothed, and sheltered  27
by charity.  Neither can they serve two masters, giving         1
only a portion of their time to God, and still be Christian
Scientists.  They must give Him all their services, and         3
"owe no man."  To do this, they must at present ask a
suitable price for their services, and then _conscientiously_
_earn their wages_, strictly practising Divine Science, and     6
healing the sick.

The author never sought charitable support, but gave
fully seven-eighths of her time without remuneration, ex-       9
cept the bliss of doing good. The only pay taken for her
labors was from classes, and often those were put off for
months, in order to do gratuitous work.  She has never          12
taught a Primary class without several, and sometimes
seventeen, free students in it; and has endeavored to take
the full price of tuition only from those who were able to      15
pay.  The student who pays must of necessity do better
than he who does not pay, and yet will expect and require
others to pay him.  No discount on tuition was made on          18
higher classes, because their first classes furnished students
with the means of paying for their tuition in the higher
instruction, and of doing charity work besides.  If the         21
Primary students are still impecunious, it is their own
fault, and this ill-success of itself leaves them unprepared
to enter higher classes.                                        24

People are being healed by means of my instructions,
both in and out of class.  Many students, who have
passed through a regular course of instruction from me,         27
have been invalids and were healed in the class; but ex-
perience has shown that this defrauds the scholar, though       1
it heals the sick.

It is seldom that a student, if healed hi a class, has left     3
it understanding sufficiently the Science of healing to im-
mediately enter upon its practice.  Why?  Because the
glad surprise of suddenly regained health is a shock to         6
the mind; and this holds and satisfies the thought with
exuberant joy.

This renders the mind less inquisitive, plastic, and tract-     9
able; and deep systematic thinking is impracticable until
this impulse subsides.

This was the principal reason for advising diseased             12
people not to enter a class.  Few were taken besides inva-
lids for students, until there were enough practitioners to
fill in the best possible manner the department of healing.     15
Teaching and healing should have separate departments,
and these should be fortified on all sides with suitable and
thorough guardianship and grace.                                18

Only a very limited number of students can advanta-
geously enter a class, grapple with this subject, and well
assimilate what has been taught them.  It is impossible         21
to teach thorough Christian Science to promiscuous and
large assemblies, or to persons who cannot be addressed
individually, so that the mind of the pupil may be dissected    24
more critically than the body of a subject laid bare for
anatomical examination.  Public lectures cannot be such
lessons in Christian Science as are required to empty and       27
to fill anew the individual mind.

If publicity and material control are the motives for           1
teaching, then public lectures can take the place of private
lessons; but the former can never give a thorough knowledge     3
of Christian Science, and a Christian Scientist will never
undertake to fit students for practice by such means. Lec-
tures in public are needed, but they must be subordinate        6
to thorough class instruction in any branch of education.

None with an imperfect sense of the spiritual significa-
tion of the Bible, and its scientific relation to Mind-         9
healing, should attempt overmuch in their translation of
the Scriptures into the "new tongue;" but I see that
some novices, in the truth of Science, and some impostors are   12
committing this error.

_Is there more than one school of scientific healing?_

In reality there is, and can be, but one school of the          15
Science of Mind-healing.  Any departure from Science is
an irreparable loss of Science.  Whatever is said and
written correctly on this Science originates from the Princi-   18
ple and practice laid down in Science and Health, a work
which I published in 1875.  This was the first book, re-
corded in history, which elucidates a pathological Science      21
purely mental.

Minor shades of difference in Mind-healing have origi-
nated with certain opposing factions, springing up among        24
unchristian students, who, fusing with a class of aspirants
which snatch at whatever is progressive, call it their first-
fruits, or else _post mortem_ evidence.                         27

A slight divergence is fatal in Science.  Like certain          1
Jews whom St. Paul had hoped to convert from mere
motives of self-aggrandizement to the love of Christ, these     3
so-called schools are clogging the wheels of progress by
blinding the people to the true character of Christian
Science, -- its moral power, and its divine efficacy to         6
heal.

The true understanding of Christian Science Mind-
healing never originated in pride, rivalry, or the deification  9
of self.  The Discoverer of this Science could tell you of
timidity, of self-distrust, of friendlessness, toil, agonies, and
victories under which she needed miraculous vision to           12
sustain her, when taking the first footsteps in this
Science.

The ways of Christianity have not changed.  Meek-               15
ness, selflessness, and love are the paths of His testimony
and the footsteps of His flock.






WORKS ON CHRISTIAN SCIENCE
WRITTEN BY MARY BAKER EDDY
Published by the
Trustees under the Will of Mary Baker Eddy

---
---

SCIENCE AND HEALTH WITH KEY TO THE SCRIPTURES

In one volume, 700 pages. The original, standard, and only textbook on
Christian Science Mind-healing. Cloth, one to eleven copies inclusive
(cloth only), each $3.00; twelve or more, each $2.75. Ooze leather,
vest pocket size, single copy $8.00; twelve or more, each $2.75.
Morocco, vest pocket size, single copy $3.50; twelve or more, each
$3.25. Pull leather, stiff, beveled boards, gilt edges, same paper as
in cloth binding, single copy $4.00; twelve or more, each $3.75. Black
or blue morocco, limp, round corners, gilt edges, Oxford India Bible
paper, convenient for pocket, single copy $5.00; twelve or more, each
$4.75. Levant, divinity circuit, leather lined to edge, round corners,
gilt edges, silk sewed, heavy Oxford India Bible paper (wide margins,
large-sized book), single copy $8.50; twelve or more, each $8.25.

EDITION DELUXE, blue levant, round corners, gilt edges, wide margins,
heavy Oxford India Bible paper, single copy $8.50; six or more, each
$8.25.

LARGE TYPE EDITION. Designed especially for the use of First Readers.
Large type (18-point) on Oxford India Bible paper, bound in leather.
Size 8 by 10% inches. Single copy $11.50, with a discount of 25 cents
each when included in an order for twelve or more copies of Science and
Health, and in any or all of the different bindings.

FRENCH TRANSLATION. Alternate pages of English and French. Cloth, one
to five copies inclusive, each $3.50; six or more, each $3.25. Pocket
edition, printed on Oxford India Bible paper, cloth cover, one to five
copies, each $4.50; six or more, each $4.25; morocco, one to five
copies inclusive, $7.50; six or more, each $7.25. Orders for the French
translation in lots of six or more may include all bindings.

GERMAN TRANSLATION. Alternate pages of English and German. Cloth, one
to five copies inclusive, each $3.50; six or more, each $3.25. Pocket
edition, printed on Oxford India Bible paper, cloth cover, one to five
copies each $4.50; six or more, each $4.25; morocco, one to five copies
inclusive, each $7.50; six or more, each $7.25. Orders for the German
translation in lots of six or more may include all bindings.

SCIENCE AND HEALTH FOR THE BLIND. In revised Braille, Grade One and a
Half, size 13 x 13% inches, five volumes, price $12.50; no quantity
discount is allowed on orders for the Textbook for the blind.

Orders for Science and Health in lots of six or more at quantity prices
may include English, German, and French editions, and any or all styles
of binding.

MISCELLANEOUS WRITINGS
A book of 471 pages, containing articles published in _The Christian,
Science Journal_ from 1883 to 1896, with revisions and additions.
Cloth, single copy $2.25; twelve or more, each $2.00. Morocco, limp,
round corners, gilt edges, Oxford India Bible paper, convenient for
pocket, single copy $4.00; twelve or more, each $3.75. Levant, divinity
circuit, leather lined to edge, round corners, gilt edges, silk sewed,
Oxford India Bible paper, single copy $5.00; twelve or more, each
$4.75. Orders for Miscellaneous Writings in lots of twelve or more may
include any or all of the different styles of binding. No discount will
be allowed on orders for twelve books which include both Science and
Health and Miscellaneous Writings.

THE FIRST CHURCH OF CHRIST, SCIENTIST, AND MISCELLANY
A book of 366 pages, containing articles published in _The Christian
Science Journal_ and _Sentinel_ subsequent to the compilation of
Miscellaneous Writings, together with historical matter pertaining
thereto. Cloth, single copy $2.25; six or more, each $2.00. Morocco,
limp, round corners, gilt edges, Oxford India Bible paper, convenient
for pocket, single copy $4.00; six or more, each $3.75. Orders for six
or more may include the two styles of binding.

PROSE WORKS OTHER THAN SCIENCE AND HEALTH
Combined in one volume of 1312 pages Miscellaneous Writings, The First
Church of Christ, Scientist, and Miscellany, and all the published
shorter writings of Mary Baker Eddy. Pocket edition, morocco, limp,
round corners, gilt edges, Oxford India Bible paper, uniform with the
pocket edition of Science and Health, single copy, $14.00; six or more,
each, $13.50.

CONCORDANCE TO SCIENCE AND HEALTH
This work contains about eighty thousand references (more than ten
thousand words being indexed), also an index to the Marginal Headings,
and a list of the Scriptural Quotations in Science and Health. 611
pages, cloth cover, single copy $4.00; six or more, each $3.30. rocket
size, Oxford India Bible paper, morocco, limp, round corners, gilt
edges; single copy $6.00; six or more, each $5.SO. Large levant Bible
paper edition, gold stamped cover, limp, round corners, gilt edges;
single copy $7.00; six or more, each $6.50. Orders for six or more may
include any or all of the concordances in any or all styles of binding.

CONCORDANCE TO MRS. EDDY'S PUBLISHED WRITINGS OTHER THEN SCIENCE AND
HEALTH
Containing 1103 pages, large cloth edition, single copy $5.50; six or
more, each $5.00. Pocket size, Oxford India Bible paper, morocco, limp,
round corners, gilt edges; single copy $7.50; six or more, each $7.00.
Large levant Bible paper edition, gold stamped cover, limp, round
corners, gilt edges; single copy $8.50; six or more, each $8.00. Orders
for six or more may include any or all of the Concordances in any or
all styles of binding.

COMPLETE CONCORDANCE TO MRS. EDDY'S WORKS
Containing the Concordance to Science and Health, and the Concordance
to Other Writings, in one volume; size 5 5/8 x 7 1/4 x 1 3/8 inches.
Oxford India Bible paper, morocco, limp, round corners, gilt edges;
single copy $11.00; six or more, each $10.50. Orders for six or more
may include any or all of the Concordances in any or all styles of
binding.

CHURCH MANUAL
Containing the By-laws of The Mother Church. Cloth, single copy $1.00;
six or more, each 75 cents. Pocket edition, morocco, limp, round
corners, gilt edges, Oxford India Bible paper, single copy $2.00; six
or more, each $1.75.

GERMAN TRANSLATION.  Alternate pages of English and German. Cloth,
single copy $1.00; six or more, each 75 cents.

FRENCH TRANSLATION.  Alternate pages of English and French. Cloth,
single copy $1.00; six or more, each 76 cents.

CHRIST AND CHRISTMAS
An illustrated poem. Cloth, single copy $3.00; six or more, each $2.50.

UNITY OF GOOD AND OTHER WRITINGS
One volume, containing Unity of Good, Rudimental Divine Science, No
and Yes, Retrospection and Introspection; uniform in style with the
pocket edition of Science and Health. Morocco, limp, round corners,
gilt edges, heavy Oxford India Bible paper, single copy $3.50; six or
more, each $3.26. Library edition, cloth, marbled edges, single copy
$2.00; six or more, each $1.75,

CHRISTIAN HEALING AND OTHER WRITINGS
One volume containing Christian Healing, The People's Idea of God,
Pulpit and Press, Christian Science _versus_ Pantheism, Messages of
1900, 1901, 1902; uniform in style with the pocket edition of Science
and Health. Morocco, limp, round corners, gilt edges, heavy Oxford
India Bible paper, single copy $3.50; six or more, each $3.25. Library
edition, cloth, marbled edges, single copy $2.00; six or more, each
$1.75.

RETROSPECTION AND INTROSPECTION
A biographical sketch of the author; the way she was led to the
discovery of Christian Science; its fundamental idea and growth.
Library edition, cloth, marbled edges, 95 pages, single copy $1.00; six
or more, each 75 cents.

SMALL POCKET EDITION with numbered lines. Cloth, round corners, gray
edges, single copy 50 cents; six or more, each 45 cents. Morocco, limp,
round corners, gilt edges, single copy $1.75; six or more, each $1.60.

PRINTED in Revised Braille, Grade One and a Half, system of type for
the blind, 137 pages, interpolated; single copy $3.50; six or more,
each $3.25.

UNITY OF GOOD
This book lays the axe at the root of error, elucidating and enforcing
practical Christian Science, thus affording invaluable directions for
all true Scientists. Pocket edition, leather covers, single copy $1.00;
six or more, each 75 cents.

PRINTED in Revised Braille, Grade One and a Half, system of type for
the blind, 67 pages, single copy $2.00; six or more, each $1.75.

UNITY OF GOOD, AND TWO SERMONS
One volume, containing Unity of Good, Christian Healing, and The
People's Idea of God. Library edition, cloth, marbled edges, single
copy $1.00; six or more, each 75 cents. Small pocket edition with
numbered lines, cloth, round corners, gray edges, single copy 50 cents;
six or more, each 45 cents; morocco, limp, round corners, gilt edges,
single copy $1.75; six or more, each $1.60.

PULPIT AND PRESS
A unique work, of importance in the history and to the readers of
Christian Science; containing the message or sermon written for the
dedicatory service of The Mother Church, January 6, 1895, and
scintillations from the press of that occasion. Library edition, cloth,
marbled edges, 90 pages, single copy $1.00; six or more, each 75 cents.

SMALL POCKET EDITION with numbered lines. Cloth, round corners, gray
edges, single copy 50 cents; six or more, each 45 cents. Morocco, limp,
round corners, gilt edges, single copy $1.75; six or more, each $1.60.

RUDIMENTAL DIVINE SCIENCE
A brief and concise statement of Divine Science, _alias_ Christian
Science, in the form of questions and answers. Pebbled cloth covers,
gilt top, 17 pages, single copy 32 cents; six or more, each 25 cents.

PRINTED in the New York point and American Braille systems of type for
the use of the blind, single copy 50 cents; six or more, each 40 cents.

NO AND YES
A brief statement of very important points in Christian Science.
Pebbled cloth covers, 46 pages, single copy 32 cents; six or more, each
25 cents.

RUDIMENTAL DIVINE SCIENCE, and NO AND YES
LIBRARY EDITION with numbered lines, cloth, marbled edges, single copy
$1.00; six or more, each 75 cents.

SMALL POCKET EDITION with numbered lines. Cloth, round corners, gray
edges, single copy 60 cents; six or more, each 43 cents. Morocco, limp,
round corners, gilt edges, single copy $1.75; six or more, each $1.60.

PRINTED in Revised Braille, Grade One and a Half, system of type for
the blind, 70 pages, single copy $2.00; six or more, each $1.75.

TRANSLATIONS. English-French, English-German, English-Dutch, English-
Danish, English-Norwegian, English-Swedish, English-Czech. In one
volume, alternate pages of English and the translation; library
edition, cloth, each $1.00; six or more, each 75 cents; pocket edition,
leatherette, round corners, gilt edges, each $1.50; six or more, each
$1.25.

MESSAGES TO THE MOTHER CHURCH
Including in one volume, 94 pages, Christian Science _versus_
Pantheism, and the Messages of 1900, 1901, and 1902. Library edition,
cloth, marbled edges, single copy $1.50; six or more, each $1.15.

SMALL POCKET EDITION with numbered lines. Cloth, round corners, gray
edges, single copy SO cents; six or more, each 45 cents. Morocco, limp,
round corners, gilt edges, single copy $1.75; six or more, each $1.60.

CHRISTIAN SCIENCE VERSUS PANTHEISM
The Pastor Emeritus' Message delivered at the Communion Season in The
Mother Church in Boston, June, 1898. A clear and strong refutation of
the charge that Christian Scientists are pantheists. Pebbled cloth
covers, 15 pages, single copy 25 cents; six or more, each 20 cents.

MESSAGE TO THE MOTHER CHURCH, June, 1900
Paper covers, deckled edges, 15 pages, single copy 25 cents; six or
more, each 20 cents.

MESSAGE TO THE MOTHER CHURCH, June, 1901
Paper covers, deckled edges, 35 pages, single copy 50 cents; six or
more, each 38 cents.

MESSAGE TO THE MOTHER CHURCH, June, 1902 Paper covers, deckled edges,
20 pages, single copy 50 cents; Six Or more, each 38 cents.

CHRISTIAN HEALING
A sermon delivered in Boston. Paper cover, 90 pages, single copy 20
cents; six or more, each 17 cents.

THE PEOPLE'S IDEA OF GOD
A sermon delivered in Boston. Paper covers! 14 pages, single copy 90
cents; six or more, each 17 cents.

POEMS
This volume of 79 pages includes all of Mrs. Eddy's hymns, also her
earlier poems which appeared in various publications from forty to
sixty years ago. Specially bound. Single copy $1.50; six or more, each
$1.35.

Published also in morocco, limp, round corners, gilt edges, uniform in
style with the pocket edition of Science and Health. Single copy $3.00;
six or more, each $2.75.

SOLOS
Poems by Mary Baker Eddy set to music

Catalogue of solos will be sent on request. No music will be sent on
approval.

List of solos containing words by Mrs. Eddy, used by permission, and
published by other publishers, sent on request.

The foregoing prices cover all charges for express or postage on
shipments either domestic or foreign.

---
---

Address all orders and make all remittances payable to

HARRY I. HUNT, PUBLISHERS' AGENT
107 FALMOUTH STREET, BACK BAY STATION
BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS, U. S. A.





End of Project Gutenberg's Rudimental Divine Science, by Mary Baker G. Eddy

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RUDIMENTAL DIVINE SCIENCE ***

***** This file should be named 19666.txt or 19666.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/9/6/6/19666/

Produced by Michael Gray

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
