The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Kingdom of God, Part 1, by Orson Pratt

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Kingdom of God, Part 1

Author: Orson Pratt

Release Date: July 10, 2014 [EBook #46244]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KINGDOM OF GOD, PART 1 ***




Produced by Heidi Billy, Mormon Texts Project Intern. See
http://mormontextsproject.org/ for a complete list of
Mormon texts available on Project Gutenberg, to help
proofread similar books, or to report typos.







The Kingdom of God

Part 1.

* * * *

BY ORSON PRATT

ONE OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES OF THE CHURCH OF JESUS
CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS

* * * *

The kingdom of God is an order of government established by divine
authority. It is the only legal government that can exist in any part
of the universe. All other governments are illegal and unauthorized.
God, having made all beings and worlds, has the supreme right to govern
them by his own laws, and by officers of his own appointment. Any
people attempting to govern themselves by laws of their own making, and
by officers of their own appointment, are in direct rebellion against
the kingdom of God. The antediluvians were overthrown by a flood,
because they rejected the government of the Almighty, and instituted
their own governments in its stead. Noah and his family were the only
loyal and obedient subjects to the legal power: they alone were saved.
The universal desolation and utter abolishment of all the unauthorized
man-made governments of the old world, should have been an everlasting
warning to all future generations to avoid the same rebellion, and to
establish no governments on the earth of human origin. But, alas! the
posterity of Noah soon revolted from the only legal, rightful power,
and set up for themselves forms of governments of their own inventions.
The rebellion soon became so general, that all the inhabitants of the
earth, except Melchizedek, Abraham, Lot, and a very few others, engaged
themselves in it, supporting and upholding kings and other officers in
their usurped authority, and suffering themselves to be governed by
human laws, instead of revealed laws from God. From that time until the
present, empires, kingdoms, principalities, republics, and numerous
other corrupt, illegal, unauthorized powers, have multiplied themselves
in the four quarters of the globe. At various times, during the last
four thousand years, God has asserted his rights, and endeavoured to
establish his own authority, his own laws, and his own government among
the children of men. But so great was the opposition manifested by
those illegal, rebellious powers, that his government while on earth
was exceedingly limited in numbers. The vast majority of mankind made
war against it--overcame, killed, and destroyed its officers and loyal
subjects, until not a vestige of it was left remaining on the earth.
For seventeen hundred years the nations upon the eastern hemisphere
have been entirely destitute of the "_kingdom of God_"--entirely
destitute of a true and legal government--entirely destitute of
officers legally authorized to rule and govern. All the emperors,
kings, princes, presidents, lords, nobles, and rulers, during that long
night of darkness, have acted without authority. Not one of them was
called or anointed a king or a prince by the God of heaven--not one of
them received his office or appointment by him--not one of them has
received revelations or laws from him--not one of them has received any
communication whatsoever from the rightful sovereign, the Great King.
Their authority is all assumed--it originated in man. Their laws are
not from the Great Lawgiver, but the productions of their own false
governments. Their very foundations were laid in rebellion, and the
whole superstructure, from first to last, is a heterogeneous mass of
discordant elements, in direct opposition to the kingdom of God, which
is the only true government which should be recognized on earth or in
heaven.

The kingdom of God is a theocracy. And as it is the only form of
government which will redeem and save mankind, it is necessary that
every soul should be rightly and thoroughly instructed in regard to its
nature and general characteristics. The beauty, glory, power, wisdom,
and order of the kingdom of God may be more fully understood by a
careful examination of the following subjects.

First.--_The nature and character of the King_.

Second.--_The character and requisite qualifications of the subordinate
officers_.

Third.--_The nature and character of the laws of adoption, or the
invariable rule by which aliens are admitted into the kingdom as
citizens_.

Fourth.--_The nature and character of the laws given for the government
of all adopted citizens_.

Fifth.--_The character, disposition, and qualifications necessary for
every citizen to possess_.

Sixth.--_The rights, privileges, and blessings enjoyed by the subjects
in this life_.

Seventh.--_The rights, privileges, and blessings promised to the
faithful, obedient subjects in a future life_.

Dear reader, your future well-being in all time to come, depends upon
your rightly understanding these seven subjects. Read, therefore, with
serious attention, and your mind shall be opened to see things that you
never saw before; things too of infinite importance, without which you
can in no wise be saved. Let us begin by examining--

First.--_The nature and character of the King_. God is the King. In
him exists all legal authority. He alone has the right of originating
a system of government on the earth. He claims this right by virtue
of his having made man and the earth he inhabits. Man, therefore, is
indebted to God for his own formation and for the formation of the
planet on which he dwells. He also claims the right of establishing his
government among men, by virtue of his superior wisdom and power. If
God had sufficient wisdom and power to construct such a beautiful world
as this, with all the infinite varieties of vegetables and animals
appended to it; if he could form such an intricate and complicated
piece of machinery as the human tabernacle as a dwelling-place for
the human spirit, then we must admit that his wisdom and power are
immeasurably greater than that of man, and hence he is qualified to
reign as king. An order of government, established by such an all-wise,
powerful being, must be good and perfect, and must be calculated to
promote the permanent peace, happiness, and well-being of all his
subjects. The Great King is a very amiable being, full of benevolence
and goodness, and never turns any person away empty, that comes
requesting a favor which he sees would be for his benefit.

The King occasionally visited his subjects in ancient times, and once
tarried with them for several years; but he received such cruel abuse
from many of the people that he left them, and went to some other part
of his dominions. Where the King is gone the people cannot tell. They
have not heard one word from him for upwards of seventeen hundred
years. He has been absent so long, that some of the people have doubted
even his existence. They have argued that if he did exist, that some
one would very likely have heard something from him in the course
of so many centuries. Many millions however have some idea that he
exists, and are constantly sending all kinds of petitions to him; but
for some reason he sends no word back. No messengers are dispatched
to the petitioners to give them any counsel upon any subject. It has
become a very popular thing to send daily petitions to the King, and to
appropriate one day out of seven for the especial purpose of sending in
their petitions. The same petitions are frequently sent a great number
of times. It is very unpopular however for any one to expect the King
to make any reply to any petitions sent in. Any one pretending to have
received a reply would be counted a base impostor; for, say they, the
King has spoken to no one for the last seventeen hundred years; no one
has heard from him since he conversed with his servant John on the Isle
of Patmos. The King conversed very freely with his subjects in the
early and middle ages; and some think it very strange that he has been
silent so long. They have expended millions in building many costly and
magnificent churches in honor of his name; but yet he has not deigned
to grace one of them with a visit, neither has he condescended to send
any tidings to them by a messenger or otherwise. He has not informed
them whether he was pleased or displeased with their splendid edifices.
His profound silence for so many centuries has caused many to think
that he was, for some reason, very angry with the people; yet they
could not see why he should be angry when the people were doing so much
to honor him--when they were expending millions to hire learned men to
preach and write in such an eloquent manner about him.

Reader, can you tell why the King should be so distant? Why he holds no
communication with any of the people? Why he has not sent one sentence
of consolation or counsel to them? Why he has suffered some fifteen
thousand millions of the human race to fall into their graves, in the
latter ages, without condescending to speak one word to any of them?
There must be some cause for all this. There must be something wrong.
The King never formerly served his people in this manner; and when he
went away, he left word that if any of his people lacked wisdom or
knowledge on any subject, they should send in their petition to him,
and he would liberally send them the requisite information.

I will now tell you the reason why the King has kept silence so long.
It is because he has had no subjects to converse with; all have turned
away from him and advocated other governments as being the rightful
and legal authority. They killed off and utterly destroyed every
true subject of his kingdom, and left not a vestige of it upon the
earth; and, to add to their guilt and wickedness, they have introduced
idolatry in its worst forms, and utterly turned away from the true and
living God. They have introduced a "_God without_ BODY, PARTS _or_
PASSIONS." They have had the audacity to call this newly-invented god
by the same name as the God of the ancient Saints, although there
is not the least resemblance between them. Indeed there could be no
resemblance between them; for a bodiless god, without "_parts or
passions_," could resemble nothing in heaven, on earth, or in hell.
This imaginary modern god has become exceedingly popular. It is to him
that a vast number of churches have been erected. It is not to the
true and living God that they send forth petitions, but it is to this
imaginary being. No wonder that they have received no communication
from him! no wonder he has not honored them with a visit. As he has no
"PARTS," he could neither be felt nor seen if he should visit them.
Such a being could not speak, for he has no "parts" to speak with.

There have been various species of idolatry in different ages of the
world. The sun, moon, stars, beasts, crocodiles, frightful serpents,
images of wood, of stone, and of brass, have been erected into gods,
and worshipped by innumerable multitudes. But the system of idolatry,
invented by modern christianity, far surpasses in absurdity anything
that we have ever heard of. One of the celebrated worshippers of
this newly-discovered god, in his "Physical Theory of Another Life,"
says, "A disembodied spirit, or, we should rather say, an unembodied
spirit, or sheer mind, is NO WHERE. Place is a relation belonging to
extension; and extension is a property of matter: but that which is
wholly abstracted from matter, and in speaking of which we deny that it
has any property in common therewith, can in itself be subject to none
of its conditions; and we might as well say of a pure spirit that it
is hard, heavy, or red, or that it is a cubic foot in dimensions, as
say that it is _here_ or _there_. It is only in a popular and improper
sense that any such affirmation is made concerning the Infinite Spirit,
or that we speak of God as _every where_ present. God is in every place
in a sense, altogether incomprehensible by finite minds, inasmuch
as his relation to space and extension is peculiar to infinitude.
Using the terms as we use them of ourselves, God is not _here_ or
_there_, any more than he exists _now_ and _then_." This species of
idolatry, according to the foregoing quotations, approaches so near
to Atheism, that no one can tell the difference. Reader, can you see
the difference? A god "_without a body!_" A god "_without parts!_" A
god that cannot be "_here_ or _there!_" A god that is "NO WHERE!" A
god that cannot exist "NOW and THEN!" A god that exists in NO TIME! A
god that has no _extension_--no "_parts_"--no conceivable relation to
_time_ or _space!_ O, blush for modern christianity!--a pious name for
Atheism! Some perhaps may think that I have not sufficient charity.
But why should I have charity for a god that has no "_parts_"--no
relation to space? Let him first have charity for himself. But this
would be impossible; for he is a god "_without passions_." He can have
no charity nor love for himself nor any one else. There is no danger
of offending him; for a passionless god is not capable of anger. One
of the persons of this imaginary god is said to have been crucified.
But this must be a sad mistake; for it would be impossible to crucify a
portion of something that had no "_parts_." The reason, then, why the
people have not received any word from the Great King, is because they
have petitioned the wrong god. Would you expect her majesty, the queen
of England, to answer your petition if it were directed to some African
prince? Would you expect the God of heaven to answer a petition that
was addressed to a Hindoo god? If, then, your petitions are addressed
to the bodiless, passionless god of modern christianity, you must not
be surprised if the true God does not pay any attention to it. You need
not expect that the true God will make any reply to petitions offered
to any other being.

The true God exists both in time and in space, and has as much relation
to them as man or any other being. He has extension, and form, and
dimensions, as well as man. He occupies space; has a body, parts, and
passions; can go from place to place--can eat, drink, and talk, as
well as man. Man resembles him in the features and form of his body,
and he does not differ materially in size. When he has been seen among
men, he has been pronounced, even by the wicked, as one of their own
species. So much did he look like man, that some supposed him to be the
carpenter's son. Like man, He had a Father; and he was "_the express
image of the person of the Father_." The two persons were as much alike
in form, in size, and in every other respect as fathers and sons are
of the human race; indeed, the human race are "_his offspring_," made
in his likeness and image, not after his moral image, but after the
image of his person. There is no such thing as moral image. Such an
image cannot exist. Morality is a property of some being or substance.
A property without a substance or being to which it appertains is
inconceivable. A property can never have figure, shape, or image of any
kind. Hence, a moral image never had an existence except in the brains
of modern idolators.

The Godhead consists of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. The
Father is a material being. The substance of which he is composed is
wholly material. It is a substance widely different in some respects
from the various substances with which we are more immediately
acquainted. In other respects it is precisely like all other materials.
The substance of his person occupies space the same as other matter.
It has solidity, length, breadth, and thickness, like all other
matter. The elementary materials of his body are not susceptible of
occupying, at the same time, the same identical space with other
matter. The substance of his person, like other matter, cannot be in
two places at the same instant. It also requires _time_ for him to
transport himself from place to place. It matters not how great the
velocity of his movements, _time_ is an essential ingredient to all
motion, whether rapid or slow. It differs from other matter in the
superiority of its powers, being intelligent, all-wise, and possessing
the power of self-motion to a far greater extent than the coarser
materials of nature. "God is a _spirit_." But that does not make him
an immaterial being--a being that has no properties in common with
matter. The expression "_an immaterial being_," is a contradiction
in terms. Immateriality is only another name for nothing. It is the
negative of all existence. A "_spirit_" is as much _matter_ as oxygen
or hydrogen. It has many properties in common with all other matter.
Chemists have discovered between fifty and sixty kinds of matter; and
each kind has some properties in common with all other matter, and some
properties peculiar to itself which the others do not inherit. Now,
no chemist, in classifying his substances, would presume to say, This
substance is material, but that one is immaterial, because it differs
in some respects from the first. He would call them all material,
though they in some respect differed widely. So the substance called
spirit is material, though it differs in a remarkable degree from
other substances. It is only the addition of another element of a more
powerful nature than any yet discovered. He is not a being "without
_parts_," as modern idolators teach; for every whole is made up of
parts. The whole person of the Father consists of innumerable parts;
and each part is so situated as to bear certain relations of distance
to every other part. There must also be, to a certain degree, a freedom
of motion among these parts, which is an essential condition of the
movement of his limbs, without which he could only move as a whole.

All the foregoing statements in relation to the person of the Father,
are equally applicable to the person of the Son.

The Holy Spirit being one part of the Godhead, is also a material
substance, of the same nature and properties in many respects, as
the spirits of the Father and Son. It exists in vast immeasurable
quantities in connexion with all material worlds. This is called God
in the scriptures, as well as the Father and Son. God the Father
and God the Son cannot be everywhere present; indeed they cannot be
even in two places at the same instant; but God the Holy Spirit is
omnipresent--it extends through all space, intermingling with all other
matter, yet no one atom of the Holy Spirit can be in two places at
the same instant, which in all cases is an absolute impossibility. It
must exist in inexhaustible quantities, which is the only possible way
for any substance to be omnipresent. All the innumerable phenomena of
universal nature are produced in their origin by the actual presence
of this intelligent, all-wise, and all-powerful material substance
called the Holy Spirit. It is the most active matter in the universe,
producing all its operations according to fixed definite laws enacted
by itself, in conjunction with the Father and Son. What are called
the laws of nature are nothing more nor less than the fixed method by
which this spiritual matter operates. Each atom of the Holy Spirit is
intelligent, and like all other matter has solidity, form, and size,
and occupies space. Two atoms of this Spirit cannot occupy the same
space at the same time, neither can one atom, as before stated, occupy
two separate spaces, at the same time. In all these respects it does
not differ in the least from all other matter. Its distinguishing
characteristics from other matter are its almighty powers and infinite
wisdom, and many other glorious attributes which other materials do not
possess. If several of the atoms of this Spirit should unite themselves
together into the form of a person, then this person of the Holy Spirit
would be subject to the same necessity as the two other persons of
the Godhead, that is, it could not be everywhere present. No finite
number of atoms can be omnipresent; an infinite number of atoms is
requisite to be _everywhere_ in infinite space. Two persons receiving
the gift of the Holy Spirit, do not each receive at the same time the
same identical particles, though they each receive a substance exactly
similar in kind. It would be as impossible for each to receive the same
identical atoms at the same instant, as it would be for two men at the
same time to drink the same identical pint of water. It is these three
all-powerful substances that stand at the head of all legal government.
All governments not established by these three will be ere long
overthrown. They hold the supreme authority and power in heaven, and
in the heaven of heavens, and throughout the wide expanse of universal
nature. All principalities, powers, and kingdoms, whether in heaven or
on earth, must yield to be instructed and controlled by the supreme
power, or they cannot stand.

Second.--_The character and requisite qualifications of the subordinate
officers in the kingdom of God_ are now to be considered. As the
persons of the Father and Son cannot be every where present, it
is therefore impossible for them to attend in _person_ to all the
multiplied affairs of government among intelligent beings; therefore,
God, in establishing a government among such beings, has always called
persons of their own number to officiate in his name. The character
of these persons, previously to their calling and appointment, has
generally been that of honesty and sincerity; otherwise they have not
differed materially from other men.

The various officers, called of God to administer the affairs of his
government, are apostles, prophets, bishops, evangelists, elders,
pastors, teachers, and deacons. God has only one way of calling these
different officers, and that is by _new revelation_. No person was
ever authorized to act in the name of the Lord, unless called by _new
revelation_. Paul says (Heb. v. 4 [ch. 5]), "_No man taketh this
honour unto himself, but he that is called of God as was Aaron_."
Among the vast number of national governments now upon the earth,
where is there one that even professes to be the kingdom of God, or
that its officers were called of God as was Aaron? Human authority and
human calling are the only powers which any nation professes to have.
But there are certain petty governments, called churches, organized
within these national governments, which claim divine authority, and
consider their officers authorized to act in the name of the Lord.
But the great question is, Have any of them been called as Aaron was?
By _new revelation_ Aaron was called. By _new revelation_ the duties
of his calling were made known. Have any of the Roman Catholic or
Protestant officers been called by _new revelation_? Has God said one
word to any of them? Do they not, with very few exceptions, declare
that "There is no later revelation than the _New Testament_?" If the
revelations contained in the New Testament are the last ones given,
then the persons to whom they were given, were the last ones called
of God. When _new revelation_ ceases to be given, officers cease to
be called of God. When the calling of officers cease, the kingdom of
God ceases to be perpetuated upon the earth. Nothing is more certain
than that the church of God ceased to exist on the earth when new
revelation ceased to be given. All the modern christian churches,
who deny new revelation, have no more authority to preach, baptize,
or administer any other ordinance of the gospel than the idolatrous
Hindoos have; indeed all their administrations are worse than in
vain--they are a solemn mockery in the sight of God. It is a grievous
sin in the sight of God for any man to presume to baptize, unless God
has authorized him by new revelation to baptize in his name. Saul, the
king of Israel, lost his kingdom because he assumed the authority that
did not belong to him (I Sam. xiii. 8-15.) Another king of Israel was
smote with leprosy until the day of his death, because he attempted
to administer an ordinance without being called and authorized (2
Chron. xxvi. 16-22.) So all the baptisms and sacraments administered
by modern christian churches who have done away new revelation, are
an abomination in the sight of God. All persons who shall suffer
themselves to be baptized, or partake of these ordinances through the
administration of these illegal unauthorized persons, after having been
duly warned of the evil thereof, will bring themselves under great
condemnation before God, and unless they repent of that sin they can in
no wise be saved. The twelve apostles were called by new revelation,
but that did not authorize Paul, Barnabas, Timothy, or any other
person. Each one had to receive a separate call by new revelation for
himself. No one could lawfully act under a commission given to some
other person. All the commissions recorded in the New Testament were
given to individuals then living, and not to any individuals who should
live in some future age. If any person would have authority, let them
obtain a new commission from God, as his servants always did in ancient
times, and if they officiate without such new commission, then know
assuredly that they are impostors.

The subordinate officers in the kingdom of God must not only be
called of God, but qualified to act in their respective offices. The
first qualification absolutely necessary for every officer in the
kingdom is, _the gift of the Holy Spirit_. This is the most important
qualification of all others. No man, without this qualification, can
attain to an office in the kingdom of God; it matters not how great
his other attainments are; though he has studied the scriptures from
a child, and committed them all to memory--though he has carefully
learned the original languages in which they were written--though he
has made himself master of all sciences--grasped with a comprehensive
mind all the arguments set forth in theological works, yet none of
these attainments will qualify him for even the least office in the
kingdom of God. The unlearned youth, who had not the knowledge of the
English alphabet, if he were called of God, and qualified by the gift
of the Holy Spirit, would have more power and authority, and could
do more towards saving men, than all the theologians and doctors of
divinity that the world affords, unless they also were called of God,
and endowed with the gift of the Holy Ghost. No other qualifications
whatsoever can be substituted in the stead of the Holy Spirit. The Holy
Spirit is the great distinguishing characteristic between the officers
of the kingdom of God and impostors. Every officer sent of God has a
qualification that no impostor ever had or ever can have.

The first officers placed in the kingdom of God are apostles. Let us
enquire how in ancient times this office was conferred on man. Jesus
said to his ancient apostles (John xv. 16) "Ye have not chosen me,
but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should go and bring
forth fruit." Paul informs us (Heb. iii. 1) that Jesus himself was an
apostle. Holding the office himself, he had the most perfect right
to confer the same calling upon others; hence he first _chose_ them,
and then "_ordained_" them; after this he sent them forth to preach
(Matthew x.) "and commanded them, saying, Go not into the way of the
Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans, enter ye not: but go
rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And as ye go, preach,
saying, The kingdom of heaven is at hand. Heal the sick, cleanse the
lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils: freely ye have received,
freely give." Although these apostles were chosen, ordained, and sent
forth on a particular mission to the cities of Israel, with power to
work mighty miracles, yet there was an essential qualification which
they had not yet received. They had received power sufficient to
qualify them to preach that the "_kingdom of heaven was at hand_."
But they had not yet received power sufficient to fully organize and
build up that kingdom on the earth. They lacked one very important
qualification, without which they could never establish the kingdom
which they had already predicted "_was at hand_." What was this further
qualification which these apostles had not yet received? It was the
gift of the Holy Ghost, or the other Comforter which Jesus promised
them. It is very remarkable that these apostles should have such great
power, and yet not have the Holy Ghost. But hear what the scripture
saith (John vii. 37, 38, 39) "In the last day, that great day of the
feast, Jesus stood, and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him
come unto me, and drink. He that believeth on me, as the scripture
hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. (But
this spake he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should
receive: _for the Holy Ghost was not yet given; because that Jesus was
not yet glorified_.)" Mark the expression, "_the Holy Ghost was not
yet given_." This agrees with another saying of Jesus to his apostles
(John xvi. 7), "Nevertheless, I tell you the truth; it is expedient
for you that I go away; for if I go not away, the Comforter will not
come unto you; but if I depart I will send him unto you." Jesus calls
this Comforter the Holy Ghost (John xiv. 26). After the resurrection of
Jesus, and as he was about to be taken up into heaven, he said to his
apostles (Luke xxiv. 49), "Behold I send the promise of my Father upon
you" (alluding to the Comforter or the Holy Ghost, which he promised
several days before should be sent unto them from the Father after his
glorification); "but," said he, "tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem,
until ye be endued with power from on high." Thus you see, dear reader,
that these apostles had power to "heal the sick, cleanse the lepers,
raise the dead, and cast out devils," although the Holy Ghost was not
yet given to them. A certain power was yet lacking. Jesus had commanded
them saying, "Go ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every
creature." But he would not suffer them to commence this mission until
the promise of the Father--the Holy Ghost--was given them. They already
had power to work mighty miracles, but had not the power to build up
the kingdom of God. This power they were to tarry for in Jerusalem, and
when they should receive it, they were then to commence the duties of
their mission, first, in the city of Jerusalem, and afterwards extend
their labours to all nations. The power to work miracles is entirely
a different thing from the power to build up the kingdom of God; the
latter power, however, always includes the former, but the former power
does not always include the latter.

We now ask, Where is there a man among all the churches of modern
times, who has been called to the office of an apostle by _new
revelation?_ Where is there a man among all the millions of modern
christians who has been ordained to the office of an apostle, under
the hands of an apostle, as the Twelve were anciently? Where is there
a man to be found among all the Catholics or Protestants who has been
endowed with even the power of working miracles, to say nothing of the
still greater power communicated in the gift of the Holy Ghost? If the
apostles in ancient days could not build up the kingdom of God, without
being endowed with these two degrees of power, surely no one since
their day could be authorized to build the church of God with any less
qualification.

One of the important duties required of an apostle is to ADMINISTER
THE SPIRIT. In 2 Cor. iii 6, we read that both Paul and Timothy were
made "_able ministers_" "_of the Spirit_." The ordinance through which
the Spirit is ministered is THE LAYING ON OF HANDS. (Acts viii. and
xix. Heb. vi.) To the apostles were entrusted three very important
administrations for the salvation of man:--

First.--_The ministration of the word_.

Second.--_The ministration of the baptism of water_.

And Third.--_The ministration of the baptism of the Spirit_.

While Jesus was with his apostles in person, they had power to minister
the _word_ and _water,_ but not the _Spirit_, for they themselves had
not yet been baptized with the Spirit; and they could not administer
that which they were not in possession of. It was necessary that they
should first receive the gift themselves, before they could confer it
upon others. Hence we can perceive the propriety of Jesus commanding
them to wait "at Jerusalem until they should be endued with power from
on high;" for without this additional power they could neither save
themselves nor others. Many persons have flattered themselves, that
they can be saved without the assistance of a minister sent of God. But
this is a vain delusive hope; for Jesus hath expressly said, "Except a
man be born of water and of the Spirit he _cannot_ enter the kingdom of
God." Now as no man can be saved out of the kingdom, it is necessary
that he should be "born" into the kingdom; and this would be impossible
without an administrator sent of God; for the birth or baptism of
water, and the birth or baptism of the Spirit, require some one legally
authorized to officiate in behalf of the candidate.

Reader, have you ever received the Holy Ghost through the laying on
of the hands of one sent of God? If not, you are not yet born of the
spirit. You are not yet a child of the kingdom. Know assuredly, that
unless you find some man who has been sent by the command of God as was
Aaron, and get him to remit your sins through your faith, repentance,
and baptism, and have him to minister to you the Holy Ghost, as did
the ancient apostles--you need not flatter yourself that you can be
saved. Do not deceive yourself upon this all-important subject. Do not
suffer any man to baptize or administer unto you unless God has spoken
unto him by the voice of his servants, and authorized him to minister
in his name. Do you enquire how you are to know an authorized man of
God from one who has no authority? I will tell you how to discern the
difference. A true servant of God will never teach a false doctrine.
He will never deny new revelation. He never will tell you that the
canon of scripture is full, or that the New Testament is the last
revelation ever intended to be given to man. He never will tell you,
that miraculous gifts are no longer necessary in the church of God.
He never will tell you, that inspired apostles, prophets, and other
officers are not requisite in the church now. He never will tell you
that the "_ministration of the spirit_" by "the laying on of hands,"
is done away by God's appointment. But he will tell you, that if you
will receive his message, and be baptized by one having authority, that
your "_sins shall be remitted_," and that you shall be filled with
the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands; and that you shall know, by
the teachings thereof, that his doctrine is true and of God. In this
respect he will differ from all impostors; for an impostor never had
power to "_minister this spirit_." An imposter dare not promise you
that you shall be filled with the Holy Ghost by the laying on of his
hands; for he knows that such a promise would not be fulfilled--he
knows that you would detect him to be a false teacher by complying
with his conditions, and failing to receive his promise. An impostor,
knowing that he has no power to give the Holy Ghost as the ancient
apostles had, will endeavour to persuade you that such power is not
necessary now. He knows very well, that if he cannot get the people to
believe that such power is not necessary in these days, that his own
unauthorized pretensions will be at once detected.

An impostor, like Simon Magus, may deceive ignorant people by
witchcraft and sorcery, but he can never deceive them by pretending
to give the Holy Ghost through prayer and laying on of hands. This is
a power that none but a true minister of God possesses; it cannot be
counterfeited by the devil. The devil can counterfeit the miracles of
Christ, but he cannot counterfeit the gift of the Holy Ghost. None but
the lawful ministers of Christ can minister the spirit. This then is
an infallible sign by which to distinguish true apostles from false
ones. But does this infallible sign exist either among the Papists or
Protestants? Can any of their ministers give the Holy Ghost by the
laying on of hands? If not, they are not the church of God, and their
ministers are unauthorized--all their administrations are illegal
and an abomination in the sight of God--salvation is not among them.
Not one person among all their societies has been legally baptized.
Reader, are you a member of any of these societies? if so, haste to
withdraw yourself from them, that you partake not of their plagues,
_for the hour of their judgment is come_. If you would be saved, seek
after the apostles and prophets of the kingdom of God, and receive
their administrations, and you shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, and
obtain eternal life.

15, _Wilton Street_, _October_ 31, 1848

* * * *

R. JAMES, PRINTER, 39 B, SOUTH CASTLE STREET, LIVERPOOL.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Kingdom of God, Part 1, by Orson Pratt

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KINGDOM OF GOD, PART 1 ***

***** This file should be named 46244.txt or 46244.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/6/2/4/46244/

Produced by Heidi Billy, Mormon Texts Project Intern. See
http://mormontextsproject.org/ for a complete list of
Mormon texts available on Project Gutenberg, to help
proofread similar books, or to report typos.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
