The Project Gutenberg EBook of Labors in the Vineyard, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: Labors in the Vineyard
       Twelfth Book of the Faith-Promoting Series

Author: Various

Release Date: June 29, 2015 [EBook #49327]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LABORS IN THE VINEYARD ***




Produced by Shawnee Hawkes, Mormon Texts Project Intern
(http://mormontextsproject.org/)






LABORS
IN THE

VINEYARD.


TWELFTH BOOK OF THE

FAITH-PROMOTING SERIES.

Designed for the Instruction and Encouragement of
Young Latter-day Saints.


PUBLISHED AT THE JUVENILE INSTRUCTOR OFFICE,

SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH.

1884.



PREFACE.

The constantly increasing demand for the books of the FAITH-PROMOTING
SERIES has induced us to prepare this little work, with the hope
that it will prove no less interesting nor instructive than its
predecessors. The fact that these publications are used in many Sunday
schools with most excellent results and are read with avidity and
interest by the young people in all parts of the territory, is an
evidence to us that our labors are not in vain.

Some of the incidents narrated in this book are so miraculous that one
is naturally led to exclaim, "truth is really stranger than fiction;"
and occurring, as they have done, in the experience of our faithful
Elders, they have a double interest for young Latter-day Saints, and
will surely be the means of strengthening the faith of all those who
expect to participate in the glorious labors that devolve upon this
people. Such examples, too, as are herein presented will, undoubtedly,
have the effect to instil a proper amount of righteous ambition into
the minds of the young, thus causing them to exercise talents which are
designed, if properly used, to make of them noble men and women.

If this book should be a means of instructing or encouraging any
person, and thereby prompting him to do good, the object for which it
was prepared will have been attained, and a reward will have been given
to.

THE PUBLISHER.



CONTENTS:

MY EXPERIENCE IN ENGLAND.

CHAPTER I.

Called on a Mission--Start for my Field of Labor--Difficulties
on the Way--Travelling in Deep Snow--Reach the Platte
River--Procure a New Outfit--Exposed to the Cholera--Attacked
by the Plague--My Recovery--Arrival at Albany,
N.Y.--Take Passage on a Steamer for New York
City--Incidents on the Way.

CHAPTER II.

Set Sail from New York--Arrive in Liverpool--Sent to Labor
as a Travelling Elder--Prayers Answered--Called to Preside
Over a Conference--Blessed Abundantly with the Holy
Spirit--Procure a Hall to Preach in--Mobbed--Effects of
my Preaching--Treated with Courtesy--Organize a Branch
of the Church in the Town where I was Mobbed--Make
Another Appointment to Preach in a Different Town--Send
for Help--Speakers Interrupted--Audience Quieted
by me Singing a Comic Song--Prejudice Allayed--a
Lesson Learned.

CHAPTER III.

An Amusing Episode--Obtain the Keys of a Church--Notify
the People That a Meeting Will be Held in it--A Good
Turn Out--My Companion Preaches while I, Disguised
as a Police, Guard the Door--Excitement Aroused--Controversy
With a Minister--An Anti-"Mormon" Meeting
Held--I Attend--Reply to the Ministers' Attempts
to Expose "Mormonism"--My Escape from the Building--Saved
by an Infidel--Prosperity of the Work--Remarkable
Healings--A Prediction Uttered and Fulfilled--My
Return Home--Contrast Between the Condition of the
Saints now and that of Thirty Years Ago.

MY SWISS MISSION.

CHAPTER I.

Manner in which the Gospel is Preached--My Labors in
England--Called to Switzerland--Join my Companion and
Take Passage to France--Proceed to Switzerland--Meet
Elders in Geneva--Our Fields of Labor Assigned us.

CHAPTER II.

Arrival in Berne--Its Principal Objects of Interest--Go to
Weiningen, Where I Remain to Study German--Sketch
From my Journal--Hunted by Mobs--Interviewed by
the Mayor.

CHAPTER III.

Letter from Elder Secrist--Ordered to Zurich--Arrested
and Imprisoned in a Filthy Dungeon--Taken to Better
Quarters--Released.

CHAPTER IV.

Progress in Learning to Speak German--Communication
From the British Ambassador--Notified to Leave Zurich--Go
to Schaffhausen--The Falls of the Rhine--Unable
to Obtain Permission to Remain in the Canton--Seek
Another Place of Retreat--Lodge with a Family of Saints--Difficulty
in Keeping Secluded--Called to Geneva--Return
to England.

THE FAITH OF THE ZUNIS.

Traditions of the Zunis--Three Children Healed--Administer
to 406 Indians who were Attacked with the Small-Pox,
Most of Whom Recover--Opposed by a Presbyterian
Minister and Others--Fate of my Opposer's.

SKETCH OF A WELL-SPENT LIFE.

CHAPTER I.

My Birth and Childhood--Embrace the Gospel--a Vision--Gather
with the Saints at Kirtland--Zion's Camp--Manifestations
in the Temple--The Saints Driven from
Missouri--The Prophet and Patriarch Martyred--Our
Journey Westward--Sent on a Mission.

CHAPTER II.

Arrival in England--Appointed to the Glasgow Conference--My
Experience There--Released--Start Home--a Storm
at Sea--Case of Miraculous Healing--Arrival in the Valley.

THE LORD'S BLESSINGS.

CHAPTER I.

Called to Australia--My Ignorance--Pres. H. C. Kimball's
Prophecy Concerning me--Arrive in Sidney--Adventure
with a Dog--Go to Camden with a Fellow-Missionary--Sought
for by a Drunken Mob--God Blinds their Eyes
and we Escape--At Picton we Preach in the Court-House--The
Writing on the Wall--Our Success.

CHAPTER II.

Maligned by Sectarian Priests--Invitation to Preach at a
Distant Town--Means Provided by a Mysterious Personage--Branch
of the Church Organized--Apply to the
Authorities of the Colony for, and Receive, License and
Protection as Ministers of the Gospel--Arrested--My
Companion's Defense--Honorably Released--Go to Windsor--Unable
to Obtain Lodgings--Directed by a Stranger--Kindly
Treated--An Attempt to Poison me--My Companion
Shot at by a Ruffian.

CHAPTER III.

A Chat With a Catholic--Chased by Dogs--An Irishman's
Design to Murder me--Remarkable Escape--Adventure
with a Wild Bull--"Has he got You?"--My Release
from my Mission--Incidents of the Home Journey--A
Prophecy and its Fulfillment--A Visit to a Sick Lady--Conclusion.

RESULTS OF DISOBEDIENCE.

How our Missionaries are Suspected--Children Lost--Supposed
Case of Kidnapping--Myself and Companion are
accused--The Dead Bodies are Found--Disobedience
Brings its own Reward.



MY EXPERIENCE IN ENGLAND.

BY C. V. SPENCER.



CHAPTER I.

CALLED ON A MISSION--START FOR MY FIELD OF LABOR--DIFFICULTIES
ON THE WAY--TRAVELING IN DEEP SNOW--REACH
THE PLATTE RIVER--PROCURE A NEW OUTFIT--EXPOSED
TO THE CHOLERA--ATTACKED BY THE PLAGUE--MY
RECOVERY--ARRIVAL AT ALBANY, N. Y.--TAKE PASSAGE
ON A STEAMER FOR NEW YORK CITY--INCIDENTS
ON THE WAY.

At the April conference, 1850, I felt a presentiment that I might be
called on a mission, and kept away from conference until near the close
of the last afternoon's meeting, thinking that if I were not seen, I
should, perhaps, not be remembered, and then went to the door, and
standing on the outside pressed it open about two inches. Just as I
did this a man arose on the stand and said, "It is moved and seconded
that Claudius V. Spencer go on a mission to Europe." I turned as though
shot, walked down Main Street saying to myself, "Can it be possible
those men have any inspiration to call such a stick for a missionary?"
I think if my body and spirit had then been weighed together, I should
have pulled the beam at two thousand pounds.

Previous to this time no person had heard me pray or speak in any
public meeting.

Most of the men who were called and who accompanied this mission
were large and powerful men, physically. Among them were the father
of Horace S. Eldredge, Appleton Harmon, James Works, Thomas Grover,
Captain Davis and Father Malin. Heber C. Kimball had charge when we
were set apart and was mouth in my case, giving me a blessing greater
than my faith. Among other things he said that, I should be like Paul
of old, in the land to which I was going.

The most of the company left Salt Lake City on the 19th of April, and
those who did not go then overtook us the next morning. We carried the
mail by express with ox teams, and delivered it at Council Bluffs on
the 4th of July following.

At the time we were set apart Brother Heber forbid us taking either
money, watches, rings or chains of gold or silver, but told us to go
literally without purse or scrip. For the benefit of the missionaries
who now go by rail and frequently in first-class style, I record that
the first day out we reached the mouth of Emigration Canyon, and that
night had a severe snow storm. The next morning our cattle were all
lost. We divided into parties to find them. The party with which I went
trailed some of the cattle towards the city. They wished me to go in,
see the folks and help get the cattle back. I said, "No, I will never
enter Salt Lake again till I have fulfilled my mission, unless I am
carried in dead."

After some little trouble we again got our cattle together. The snow
in crossing the "Big and Little Mountain" was very deep; we cut a pole
twenty-seven and a half feet long, pushed it into the snow, but failed
to reach the ground. We cut poles made holes in them for the wheels of
the wagon, bent one end of the poles in the shape of a sleigh-runner,
and pulled and pushed our wagons in places by hand. We would frequently
sink into the snow almost to our necks, and after crawling out the sun
would melt the snow on our clothes so that at night we were as wet as
though we had been immersed in the water. In the mornings we stood on
the snow crusts, beat our boots and pantaloons over the wagon wheels to
get the ice out of them before we could dress. We took our stockings to
bed with us and dried them among our clothes. It was in the endurance
of these exposures that I think Elder Wm. Burton (who was very noble
and free in his labors) so weakened his constitution as to make him
unable to successfully stand the climate and disease that preyed upon
him in the old country.

One night, in East Canyon, we dug a hole in the snow seven feet deep,
put some brush on the bottom and had a good night's rest. We were
favored before morning with quite a fall of snow, which helped to keep
us warm. When we arose in the morning we were quite merry, and several
commenced singing the songs of Zion. Captain Davis and Thomas Grover
were camped a little ahead of us, and as we over to the latter's wagon
he remarked, "Missionaries who can sing in such a condition I want to
give my purse to," and he handed us one containing $23.45.

For days on this journey, from a sun-rise start to a sun-set stop, we
only made from one-half to one mile's distance, frequently putting five
and six yoke of oxen to a wagon at a time. The food our cattle had was
brouse and dry grass on the ridges where the snow had blown off.

We reached the Platte River about three o'clock, p.m., on Saturday,
May 25th, with our cattle so weak and poor that we drove several of
them loose and pulled two wagons into camp by hand. After lunch we had
a fellowship meeting. I made a motion that when we left that camping
place we should have good, light wagons, with four horses to each
one, plenty of food, and "a white man's outfit." After considerable
discussion the motion was unanimously carried, and with considerable
sarcasm I was appointed trader-in-chief to make the desired exchanges.
Several California emigrants were present at the meeting and before
night, they had donated a nice wagon, a new set of double harness, a
horse, some rice, sugar, dried apples, etc. In a few days I succeeded
in exchanging our old out-fits for fine, fat horses, and everything
needful for a comfortable journey. We put a sign on one of our wagons
"U. S. Mail," and received considerable money for drop letters.

In crossing the plains we met the cholera among the gold diggers,
who were on their way to California. We frequently had to leave the
road to avoid the stench of those who had died by its ravages, and
were but slightly covered over by their comrades. At one time I saw
a man beating his cattle with the butt of his whip, cursing loudly
at the same time; he dropped on the ground in the act and in about
fifteen minutes was dead and buried. One evening Captain Davis was
attacked with the terrible disease and in a short time was dead. The
day following I was taken with it about noon, just as we were about
to turn down to the Platte River to lunch. My brethren gave me all
encouragement, saying they would hurry to the river, and nurse me
and do all they could for me. For a few minutes I did the most rapid
thinking of my lifetime. I then told them not to take me from the main
road, for God's servants had promised me I should not die on the road
to England. They asked what they should do. I told them to let me get
out of the wagon on the sand with my face towards Europe, and then they
should go to their lunch. If they should return and find me dead, they
had better return home and conclude that "Mormonism" was a hoax. They
seemed to think my head was affected and I had to charge them in a most
solemn manner before they would let me have my way. When they came to
me from lunch I selected two brethren to hold me up by the wrists at
the hind end of the wagon, and drive the team as slowly as possible,
and when the paroxysms of the cramp came on to lift me in. This was
continued till about three o'clock, p.m., when the cholera left me. For
the width of three fingers where my stomach and bowels were cramped
over each other, my body was as black and blue for some three weeks
as any bruise I have ever seen, and as much flesh went from me in six
hours, as a fever usually takes from a man in a month. I know this,
that the faith taught me by my father, Daniel Spencer, together with
the natural grit inherited from my father and mother, saved my life.

We sold our outfits at Council Bluffs for considerable more than those
we traded for them would have brought us. As we journeyed through
the States the Elders separated to visit relatives, and on the day I
reached Albany, N. Y., I had no companion.

I had acted as cook considerable of the time on the plains; had laid
on the ground, on the brush and in the snow, assisted to wash dishes
and had done my full share of camp duty generally; but in doing this my
clothes had got into a condition that would have been a curiosity at a
dress ball. I wore a cap that many years before (I cannot recollect how
many) had been of fur; it had now got to be what might be called a skin
cap. I had two or three holes cracked through it, out of which my hair
would often be seen.

I went aboard a New York steamer and applied for a ticket for passage
and state room to that city. The agent looked at me from head to foot
and then said that I could not have one, as the boat was chartered by
the State, county, and city authorities for a pleasure trip. On looking
round I saw "U.S. Mail" as a sign on the boat; I laid down the money
before the ticket seller and demanded my ticket. After some squirming
on his part I got it. On this same day I had the "blues" as I hope
never to have them again. I had nearly concluded that there could not
be either sense or inspiration in the authorities of the Church sending
me to England on a mission, and that when I got to New York City I
would go over to my native town where I had some property and quietly
settle among my old friends and relatives. So great was the power that
the devil had over me that when I first stepped on the boat I drew a
chair into the niche by the "figure head" to avoid having conversation
with anyone. I had sat there but a few moments when a person came up
behind me and remarked that it was a pleasant evening. I made no reply.

"Boat making fine time," said he.

Still I did not answer. Soon he spoke again: "Are you traveling far,
young man?"

I jerked my chair around and answered very spitefully, "I
have _come_ a long way and I am _going_  a long way; all the way
from Salt Lake to England. Is there anything else you want?" My abruptness
had sent him back several feet, and he was looking at me with about as much
curiosity as if he were viewing a wild animal.

Very soon he smiled and said, "Yes if you come from Salt Lake there is
a good deal more I want."

He commenced asking questions, and soon several more persons gathered
around; but just then the dinner bell rang, and they invited me to go
to dine, which I did not do, as it seemed to me that I could not have
eaten at that time even if it were to save my life. After finishing
their repast I was waited upon by three gentlemen, who stated they had
engaged the cabin from the captain and wished me to preach. I told them
I had never preached in my life. They wanted to know for what I was
going to England. I told them to preach. They then wanted to know why
I would not preach in the cabin, my answer being that it was because I
was not sent here to preach. We finally compromised the matter by my
consenting to go to the cabin and answer questions. The room was so
crowded that they could not sit down, but stood around in circles, and
took turns in asking me questions.

When I first sat down I noticed a large, black-eyed, black-haired man,
and said to myself, "When he comes I will have the devil." After some
time he pushed forward and literally covered me with compliments. He
then remarked, "You must excuse me, young friend, after your testimony
of the goodness of your people, for asking why _such_  men as George J.
Adams, John C. Bennett, Dr. Foster, Charles Foster and others could not
live peaceably in your community?"

My answer followed like lightning: "It was because they were such
gamblers, whore-masters, black-legs and rascals as you are."

He made a bound for me; six men caught him, pulled him to the outside
of the circle, and slapping him on the back told him with an oath, that
if God Almighty had come down out of heaven He could not have told his
character any better than the little "Mormon" had.

I answered questions until about eleven o'clock at night, when I sprang
from my chair and said, "Gentlemen, you have had 'Mormonism' enough for
one night," and I started for my room. I was stopped and led back to
my chair, when I received a unanimous vote of thanks and the proffer
to raise me three hundred dollars if I would accept the amount. I told
the gentlemen that we preached the gospel without purse or scrip, and
that I had already received enough to take me to England. I selected,
however, three reliable men, who promised me to see that the three
hundred dollars were given to the poor in their neighborhoods during
the next Winter.

I went into my room and prostrated myself with my face on the floor,
and thanked God for the gift of the Holy Ghost, for I had most surely
talked by inspiration. I asked forgiveness for my unbelief, and from
that time I was wholly contented to go to England.



CHAPTER II.

SET SAIL FROM NEW YORK--ARRIVE IN LIVERPOOL--SENT
TO LABOR AS A TRAVELING ELDER--PRAYERS ANSWERED--CALLED
TO PRESIDE OVER A CONFERENCE--BLESSED
ABUNDANTLY WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT--PROCURE A HALL
TO PREACH IN--MOBBED--EFFECTS OF MY PREACHING--TREATED
WITH COURTESY--ORGANIZE A BRANCH OF THE
CHURCH IN THE TOWN WHERE I WAS MOBBED--MAKE
ANOTHER APPOINTMENT TO PREACH IN A DIFFERENT
TOWN--SEND FOR HELP--SPEAKERS INTERRUPTED--AUDIENCE
QUIETED BY ME SINGING A COMIC SONG--PREJUDICE
ALLAYED--A LESSON LEARNED.

Having rejoined my fellow-missionaries in New York, we sailed from
that port August 15th, on the ship _Lady Franklin,_  passage, $10 per
head, we having to board and cook for ourselves. After a fair voyage we
arrived in Liverpool on the 14th of September, 1850. I spent a few days
in that city, and was most kindly treated by Apostle Orson Pratt, then
President of the British Mission.

I was sent from there to London, and Brother Pratt intended me to have
a few weeks to rest, and learn the "ropes" among the branches, and
Saints of that city. But the president of that conference sent me to
Colchester, fifty miles from London. It was a hard place and in order
to have raised any life there in relation to "Mormonism," one would
have required the power to resurrect the dead.

I suffered very much in spirit as well as in body. I finally said to
myself, "you were sent to this land by God's highest authority to
preach the gospel, and it is your duty to do it." The next morning,
after thus commenting to myself, I started for a town twenty miles
distant. The roads were wet and heavy and, with my carpet-bag, the walk
was a hard one.

I came in sight of the place, on the top of a long hill, and noticed a
woman crossing the road with two pails. She filled them with water and
started back, but as she saw me walking towards her, she dropped both
pails and came to me, saying, "I knew you would come: I saw you in a
dream. Come into my house; I have a room all fixed nice and clean for
you."

Here I baptized my first fruits of the gospel, and accomplished a good
work. In a few weeks Bro. Pratt sent me to travel with Bro. Jacob
Gates, who was really like a father to me. When with him, we would
take tracts with us and go from house to house, and shop to shop in
Leicester and, in distributing them, try to get a chance to talk with
the people.

One day we had been working very hard in the rain and mud, but with
little success. As we were on our way home, at dusk, we passed the
shop of an herbalist, and I told Bro. Gates I would like to go into
this one place before going home. I bought something for a penny and,
at the same time, commenced talking "Mormonism" to a stranger. This
man's name is now very familiar to the Latter-day Saints, it being none
other than George Goddard. Previous to my visit, he had never heard of
our religion, but, as he was an honest and brave man, it was not long
before he and his family were baptized and, in a little time, gathered
to Zion.

During that day I had asked the Lord many times to give me one soul as
a comfort and testimony. I went into Bro. Goddard's shop by as direct
inspiration as any man ever did anything by its dictation.

I traveled a few weeks with Elder Gates, when I received an appointment
to take the presidency of the Norwich Conference.

I wrote to Apostle F. D. Richards, who then presided over the mission,
asking him to give me a little more time to get accustomed to preaching
and to read up my Bible. I soon received the following answer:

 "The presidency of the British Mission wishes to know if Elder C. V.
 Spencer intends to stand up to the rack in this country."

When I read it I immediately wrote in reply:

 "I shall start to Norwich by the next train, and don't care a groat
 whether there is any hay in the rack or not."

A sister was then washing my clothes, and I had quite a time to induce
her to let me have them then; but, at last, she wrung them out as dry
as she could and stuffed them into my carpet-bag. Only a few minutes
elapsed before I was on the way to Norwich.

I do not think any man ever entered upon the discharge of his duties
as president with more distrust than I did; and I wish to record here
that the great good afterwards accomplished was God's work, for He
worked through me. I only knew enough to speak and act as directed by
the Holy Spirit. The conference was represented to me as having refused
to sustain, for its president, the man suggested by the presidency at
Liverpool, and was otherwise in a somewhat peculiar condition. Under
these circumstances I was set to work; how weak I felt, I cannot
express in words. For months afterwards people would say to me, when
meeting was over, "I heard your knees knock together when you first
began to speak."

At the second meeting I held, a man jumped up and said, "We know you be
of the devil!" I understood in a moment that the battle for my victory
in that region had to be fought right then. I turned and silenced
him immediately. When I ceased speaking, the people were as meek as
children. I never had any more trouble in that branch, and the work
revived in the whole conference. The outpouring of the Holy Spirit and
the power and manifestations of God were, I think, as noticeable to the
presidency at Liverpool as they were to me.

During the entire mission I was greatly blessed with dreams and
manifestations from the Lord. On the day the revelation on plural,
or celestial, marriage was first made public in "Freemason's Hall,"
London, one of our most noted and eloquent preachers was called upon
to speak. His effort was a dry and barren failure, patent to everybody
present. There were over two hundred prominent Elders sitting on the
stand.

Jacob Gates, the president of the meeting, arose and, looking around
at the Elders, beckoned to me in a quick way, and said, "Come here and
talk." I think every one, now living, who was present at that meeting,
if asked the question, would say I was literally clothed upon with the
Holy Ghost. I prophesied freely and without fear, and have lived to see
those prophecies fulfilled to the very letter.

At one time it was manifested to me to go to a town thirty-six miles
distant, and open up the gospel. I sent word to a branch president that
I would stop at his house on a certain day when on my way to that town.
I notified several Elders to meet me at his house. We met and held a
council. I had nothing but opposition, the president saying, "Bro.
Spencer, if you go to that place, I clear myself of the consequences;
your blood be upon your own head."

I replied, "If my blood be shed, it will be upon the heads of those
who shed it, and those who ought to have, but have not got, faith to
sustain me." I then asked if any one of the Elders would volunteer to
go with me. After considerable hesitating, the youngest Elder in the
conference promised to meet me there.

That day I walked twenty-five miles and stopped at a roadside inn at
dark, with but one shilling in my pocket. I asked for some supper. The
lady of the house said she could give me some "Welsh rabbit." Being
fond of rabbit I thought I would now have a treat; but, instead of
what I expected, she brought in some toasted cheese and bread. I was
so disappointed at this that I crept into bed without supper. She,
however, took my last shilling.

The next morning I walked to the next town, twelve miles distant, and,
on nearing it, saw a lone building on the common. I hunted up the owner
and got permission to speak in it. I then went from house to house,
notifying the people of the meeting. About this time the young Elder
came, according to promise. As we went through the streets a crowd
of rude boys and girls followed us, jeering and throwing dry manure,
pieces of coal, etc., at us.

About noon we came to four cross roads in the town, one of which led to
the Elder's home. Stopping here, he said, "Brother Spencer, I cannot
stand this," and tried to persuade me to give up the labor; but failing
to move me he walked away. About dusk I found myself near a cottage on
the outskirts of the town. I went in and notified a woman (the only
occupant) that in a few minutes I would lecture--and also invited her
to attend. I started towards the place of meeting but had got only a
few steps when I felt a hand on my shoulder; turning my head, I saw the
woman I had just left; she asked me if I had eaten supper, and when I
told her I had not eaten or drank that day, she invited me back and
placed before me, I think, every good thing she had in the house. I
then started to fill my appointment.

The building was full and many were on the outside. My first reception
was a peat sod on the side of the head, which knocked me down. I soon
rallied, picked the dirt out of my ear, prayed, stretched both hands
out before my face as if to make a dive, and made a rush for the
crowd, exclaiming, as I came up, "Gentlemen, make room, I'm the man
who lectures here to-night." I succeeded in getting into the building
after promising the Lord I would say just what He gave me. I knew it
was no use to try to sing or pray. The first thought that came to me
on arising was the scripture which says, "God hath made of one blood
all nations of men that dwell on the earth," etc. I quoted it and was
barren of thought for some two minutes, when my spirit in an instant
read the people.

I claimed brotherhood by the authority of God's word, alluded to the
persecutions of the Methodists in their early days, and asked who would
think that the Methodists in so short a time would be found persecuting
other religious bodies. I called their attention to my condition,
thousands of miles away from home, etc. In a few moments several
handkerchiefs were out, wiping tearful eyes. I had a glorious meeting,
and at the close was assailed by a minister, but the crowd hoisted him
out of the building and hooted him home.

Three gentlemen took me to the best inn of the town and told the
landlord to treat me with the greatest courtesy and charge the bill
to them. In four weeks from that time I organized a branch of sixteen
members at that place.

At one time I was desirous to create an interest in a district, and
hired a town hall at a populous sea-port place; I placarded largely,
and soon found that possibly I had created more interest than would
be pleasant. As the importance of the meeting grew, so also grew a
sense of my own littleness and I sent word to Elder G. B. Wallace, at
Liverpool, and Elder Harmon, in Scotland, to come and help me. I paid
$17.50 expenses for Bro. Harmon and I think to Bro. Wallace $25.00. On
the day of the meeting I learned there would be a large mob present.
I went to the hall before the brethren and soon perceived there was
trouble ahead, but realizing how much the meeting would cost me and the
pains that had been taken I could not bear the thought of a defeat. I
had persistently plead with the Lord for victory.

The idea had become prevalent that Brother Harmon was one of the
Twelve. I called on him to speak first. The assembly listened to
him for about two minutes. Then Brother Wallace tried it, when a
blacksmith by the name of Anguish interrupted him, and Brother Wallace
spitefully told him to "shut your head." That remark brought matters
to a climax. He spoke no more than ninety seconds, and then we had a
good representation of what imagination pictures as the pandemonium
of hell. I knelt with my back to the congregation and said, "Father!
I have done all I know. If there is anything else you wish me to do,
manifest it to me when I get up and I will do it." As soon as I arose
to my feet, a comic song that I used to sing in those days came to my
mind, and I felt as though it wanted to get out of me in all my parts.
I paused a moment, stepped to the front, threw my arms out towards the
congregation, and said, "Boys, it will be a new thing for you to hear
a minister sing a comic song in a meeting; but if you will be quiet,
I will sing you one." I sang it better than ever before or since, and
at the close they gave me a good, hearty cheer. I then appealed to
them as Englishmen, telling them how Americans treated Englishmen when
they came to our country. I continued speaking for one hour, and from
the first five minutes the dropping of a pin on the floor could have
been heard. At the close many came and shook hands, and in sixpences,
shillings, etc., gave me something over $17.00.

When my hands went out towards, and over a part of that congregation I
felt power and control go with them as tangibly as I ever felt cold or
heat, and I learned this lesson, not to shirk my own responsibilities
and run for others to fill my place, let me be ever so weak.



CHAPTER III.

AN AMUSING EPISODE--OBTAIN THE KEYS OF A CHURCH--NOTIFY
THE PEOPLE THAT A MEETING WILL BE HELD
IN IT--A GOOD TURN-OUT--MY COMPANION PREACHES
WHILE I, DISGUISED AS A POLICE, GUARD THE DOOR--EXCITEMENT
AROUSED--CONTROVERSY WITH A MINISTER--AN
ANTI-"MORMON" MEETING HELD--I ATTEND--REPLY
TO THE MINISTERS' ATTEMPTS TO EXPOSE "MORMONISM"--MY
ESCAPE FROM THE BUILDING--SAVED BY
AN INFIDEL--PROSPERITY OF THE WORK--REMARKABLE
HEALINGS--A PREDICTION UTTERED AND FULFILLED--MY
RETURN HOME--CONTRAST BETWEEN THE CONDITION
OF THE SAINTS NOW AND THAT OF THIRTY YEARS AGO.

I will mention an amusing episode, that occurred during a visit that
Brother Wallace made the conference. It started in fun but resulted in
great good: I took him to a country branch where the work was pretty
dead and we stopped with a man who had a standing in the Church, but
as a reward for his _little_  faith had been made trustee of one of
the prominent sectarian churches and held the keys of their place of
worship.

We rather crowded ourselves on to him. It was a damp, cold day, and the
man of the house was very stingy with his coal. We finally found his
coal-house and helped ourselves to fuel. It was amusing to see the old
gentleman come in and out and eye our bountiful fire, and we thought
the more coal we burned the more anxious the old man would be to get us
out of the house. So the next time he came into the room he found us
with a fire that entirely filled the fire place. I took no notice of
his sour looks and gravely told him that Brother Wallace was a builder
by trade and took great pleasure in visiting the churches and public
buildings, and asked him if he would allow us the keys of his church,
that we might examine the architectural designs. He gave us the keys
and we told him we would not return that afternoon until late.

This town was divided into what was called Upper and Lower Shipdom,
and was separated by quite a little distance. The church was in Upper
Shipdom. One of us went to the lower town and notified the people
quietly that an American gentleman would lecture in the Upper Church
that evening, while the other examined the church, arranged the seats
and lights. At the hour appointed the church was pretty well filled. We
did not light up until all was ready for commencing.

Brother Wallace took the stand, and preached a very good sermon, while
I took my stand against the inside of the door dressed as a policeman
and with a club in my hand. By occasionally tapping a few on the
shoulder I succeeded in keeping pretty good order until "amen" was
said, when Brother Wallace made his exit through the back and I through
the front door. By some means the door got locked after we had passed
out, and the mob, which had by this time collected, imagining we had
locked ourselves in, made pretty violent demonstrations at the front of
the building trying to get at us while we were laughingly wending our
way to some other section.

For the next two weeks the papers of the neighborhood teemed with
accounts of "Mormon impudence," etc., and in a little time we could
not call a meeting anywhere in the conference, but what it would be
crowded. Curiosity was above par.

In another part of the district, at a noted watering place, I secured
a town hall. As soon as meeting was opened, I was interrupted by an
orthodox minister. He gave me credit for my sincerity but regretted
that I had not turned my attention to the heathen, instead of coming
there where he had preached so many years. He appealed to the
congregation to testify that they all knew he was acquainted with
every word in the Bible. I could see that trouble was imminent and my
hypocritical opponent knew it, but was desirous of bringing it along
in as respectable a manner as possible. I conversed with him for some
time on Bible doctrine, and when we had finished the whole congregation
had turned away from him and were listening to me with rapt attention.
I here learned what simple things and persons the Lord could use to
remove grave obstacles.

On two different occasions, when I was in imminent peril, my wife, who
was dead, and her father, who died in 1846, appeared to me together and
talked to me, and were as natural to me as in life.

The priests were for some time banded together in a secret
organization. The first knowledge of which came to me at the place
where I was knocked down, as already mentioned. They soon became,
however, more bold, and during a visiting tour among the branches of
my district I was warned while walking in the road, that something
was wrong in Norwich. I went immediately to that place, and before I
reached my rooms I was met by two brethren, who said, "There's a big
anti-'Mormon' meeting at St. Andrew's hall."

I replied, "Very well, I will brush up and go to it." They and others
whom I met plead with me not to go.

When I entered the hall I found it too densely packed for me to get
a seat in the body of the house. On looking to the stand I counted
seventeen of the prominent ministers of Norfolk and Suffolk comfortably
seated. I said to myself, "I also am a minister and that is my place."
I walked up and took a seat. There were two thousand people present at
that meeting. At that time St. Andrew's hall ranked as the third finest
hall in England.

The meeting commenced about half-past two, p.m., and it was about five
o'clock when I entered. At half-past eight the chairman announced that
if any member of the unfortunate "Mormon" Church was present, who had
the hardihood and moral courage to attempt a defense after such an
overwhelming exposure of their system as had been made that day to
the citizens of Norwich, he would be allowed to speak. Of course all
eyes had been on me and the invitation was a trap on the part of the
ministers. They offered me no way of getting to the pulpit as I was
behind five rows of seats each of which was packed with my opponents
and not one offered to allow me to pass. I prayed, put my hands on the
sides of the heads of the two ministers in front of me, made an opening
and stepped over into their seat; this I did with the others until I
reached the pulpit.

A great part of what I said I did not know at the time, nor have I
known since, but near the close of my remarks I found myself with my
back to the congregation and my face to the preachers. My last words to
the latter were, "You are infidels, and it is you who make infidels,
and by your precepts smother the hope of any realization of the
gifts and blessings promised by Christ and His Apostles. I prophesy,
moreover, to you in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that your labors
of this day and night, shall be the cause of hundreds embracing the
gospel I preach."

After I ceased to speak the chairman undertook to read from the Book of
Mormon, but he shook so that it was impossible for him to read. Another
man tried to speak, but he was affected in the same way and had to
desist.

There was a stairway leading from where I stood down to the vestibule,
and I hoped to reach it soon enough after the dismissal to make my
escape; but when I got there it was full of human beings, who were,
however, more like devils than men. They shouted, "Where is he? Tear
him limb from limb; throw him over into the river," etc.

A tall man wearing a cloak could see me while the rest seemed blinded.
He came up, covered me entirely with his cloak, slipped his arms under
mine, drew me up to his bosom and whispered, "Be still and I will save
you." He carried me out of the vestibule, the court yard, and nearly
a block up the street, the mob crowding up against and around us the
whole distance. My deliverer worked his way to the side of the street
until he got to his own home when he struck the spring of a door in a
stone wall, it flew open, he cast me in like a log of wood, and passed
on with the crowd. In about three-quarters of an hour he came back with
some of our people and I was liberated and guarded home. This man was
what is generally called an infidel. The next day I presented him with
the best bound set of our publications I could procure. I asked him why
he saved my life, to which he replied that it was only because of a
love of justice.

From the time of this occurrence the work prospered as it had never
done before. Our chapel was literally packed, and some citizens even
took out every window on one side, brought their own trussel and planks
and built a platform the entire length of the building. On one occasion
we went out after the evening meeting and baptized seventeen persons,
and the conversions during the whole time were quite numerous.

One evening some rowdies came intending to mob us. I sat on the stand
carefully watching every movement of the assembly. Finally I leaned
over and whispered to Brother William Foster (who now sings in the
Tabernacle choir) to sing us something. He started the hymn "Praise
to the man." The Holy Spirit rested upon the choir and the peace of
God was upon the congregation, and the quietness of the meeting was
recalled to my memory by a brother on the side-walk a few days since.

During the time the cholera raged in England, in 1852, I never entered
a house where it was, or administered to a person who had it but what
it instantly left. One rainy night I was called to go and visit a lady
who had been taken with this terrible disease. It was mid-night when
I reached the house and was met at the door with the statement that
two doctors had just left who said that the afflicted one must die. I
entered the room, walked to the bedside and commanded the person in the
name of the Lord Jesus Christ and by virtue of the Priesthood to rise
up sound and whole. In fifteen minutes she was eating supper and she
sang several songs before I left.

I wish here to bear testimony of the kindness, obedience and love of
the Saints at the Norwich conference. They were like my children and I
was their father. In their poverty they gave to me liberally, and what
I received I spent freely in helping the poor and the sick, and for the
work of God. Up to the time they presented me with means to return home
I had not saved five shillings. After my return home, the first two
hundred and seventy-five dollars I obtained I took to President Young
with the request that he send it to the poorest of the poor of Norwich
conference. He remarked as he took it, "Brother Spencer, you are the
first returned missionary that ever did the like."

Brother Neslen, who is now usually called "Father Neslen," was
president of the Lowestoft branch during my presidency of the Norwich
conference. He was in good circumstances and had a nice house, but
during my first visits to the branch he never invited me to his house,
and after late meetings used to take me away quite a distance to sleep.
On one of my visits, as we were walking on the "Esplanade," I turned to
him and said, "Brother Neslen, you may think it rather strange manners,
but I feel impressed to ask you the reason why you never invite me to
your house?" He replied that none of his family belonged to the Church
and he was afraid if he did my feelings would be hurt. (His family
consisted of a wife and nine children.)

I turned to him and said, "Brother Neslen, you are president of this
branch, and as foreign as it may be to Gentile manners I must do my
duty. I want you to invite me to your house; if you do so I promise you
in the name of the Lord that every one of your family shall embrace the
gospel, and everyone shall live to go to Zion; if you do not, and have
not faith to stand up in your place as the head of your own family you
are not fit to stand as president of the branch; and more than that,
you will apostatize and none of you be saved in the kingdom of God."

The next time I visited Lowestoft he took me to his home: his wife was
kind as a mother in her treatment and in a few months the ten souls
where baptized and all lived to reach Zion in safety.

I left the Norwich conference in the beginning of 1853. It then
numbered one thousand and fifty-nine people--one hundred and fifty
having been baptized during the last six months. I brought home with
me to Zion ninety-five souls, thus fulfilling the words of my blessing
that I should return to Zion bringing many sheaves with me. The great
majority that came have abode in the faith and they have increased and
multiplied in Israel, until they now number more than those who were
left back in the conference.

In writing this short sketch I have omitted to praise individuals whose
works in those days will make me love them while life lasts. But I wish
here to gratefully acknowledge the kindness of Elder George B. Wallace.

My health in that land was very poor. I suffered from a grievous and
dispiriting affliction all the time I was in England. After I had been
there some months I met Bro. Orson Pratt; his first exclamation was,
"What is the matter with you?" He told me I could go home. I said I had
no money, to which he replied, "I have, and you can go comfortably."

I told him I had not accomplished what I was promised. "But," said he,
"if you die here you will not accomplish it; and had you not better go
than be buried in this land?"

I answered, "I was commanded to come here and perform a certain work by
the highest authority in Zion. I will not go home unless you command
me."

He saw my faith, blessed and comforted me and I went back to my labors.

When a boy I received, at the Nauvoo Temple, my endowments and the
birthright, with promises, under the hands of my father, which I relied
upon.

I returned to Salt Lake City September 19th 1853, making three years
and five months, to a day, that I was absent.

In going through Salt Lake City I find prominent merchants who were
poor lads in my field of labor. I find an owner of real estate on Main
Street who used all the means his entire family could gather together
to bring himself out here, so that he could raise means to emigrate
them afterwards. I pass by costly shops of merchandise and find the
owners are people who, in our Norwich Conference, were very poor. I see
a cottage and beautiful grounds, and find them owned by one with whom I
shared, in that land, the portion given to me by the poor.

I go through the country and find scarcely a family of those who
emigrated in 1853 but what is surrounded by all the necessaries and
many of the comforts of life. I now realize that whether my first
mission, in its ending, was much or little, its results no man can tell.

I am satisfied and paid for the very little and feeble labors that I
performed. I returned bright and zealous in the love of the truth. God
has never yet forsaken me by His Spirit, and I do not believe that any
man will ever be trusted to walk in the footsteps of his Elder Brother,
Jesus, as a Savior of a world, or ever be seated with honor on the
right hand of His Father, until he has learned to wade through deep
and troubled waters, up stream and against the current without earthly
props or stays.

I am closing this history near my sixtieth birthday, and have been
moved to write it, that my gratitude and acknowledgement of the honor
done me by the Lord, that His testimonies given to one of His servants
in the latter-day work, might be preserved and live on the earth. I
gratefully dedicate it to President Franklin D. Richards, with the hope
and prayer that he will use it, at the time and under the circumstances
which his wisdom shall dictate, for the strengthening of the faith of
the young, and the comforting of the hearts of some old veterans whose
touching experiences have, perhaps, never been known away from their
own firesides.



MY SWISS MISSION.

BY WILLIAM BUDGE.



CHAPTER I.

MANNER IN WHICH THE GOSPEL IS PREACHED--MY LABORS
IN ENGLAND--CALLED TO SWITZERLAND--JOIN MY COMPANION
AND TAKE PASSAGE TO FRANCE--PROCEED TO
SWITZERLAND--MEET ELDERS IN GENEVA--OUR FIELDS
OF LABOR ASSIGNED US.

In presenting a sketch of missionary experience as reading matter
for the young people of modern Israel, I am aware that they may have
read many such before; but there is so much variety and interest
connected with the means and methods which have been, and are, used in
the extension of the latter-day work, that I need not apologise. So
singular and diversified have been the circumstances surrounding the
Elders, that there is a peculiar interest in all their narratives.

Some of the peculiarities of God's work are very prominently manifested
in the missionary department. The Elders are sent without purse and
without scrip, and the closer they live to this requirement, the more
successful they are likely to be. It requires, however, much faith to
do this, and it brings us face to face with many trials, temptations
and inconveniences; but it also brings us nearer to God, as our
condition requires the help which He alone can give, in blessing us
with His Spirit, raising up friends and opening up the way before us.

The Elders in modern times, like those of ancient days, have generally
been unlearned, which, according to human wisdom, would be a very
serious drawback in teaching a new faith. In addition to this, the
faith the Elders have been sent to teach is not only strange, but
unpopular in the world. The sending of men, without money or learning,
to establish a new religion, almost wholly in its nature opposed to the
views of the people among whom they are sent, seems a strange thing. We
confess it does; but God's ways are not like our ways, yet they are the
best. His way of having the gospel preached serves other purposes as
well as accomplishing the main object. It proves the integrity of the
preacher, as there are no worldly benefits attached to the work; and it
proves the sincerity of the believer, as there is no prospect of gain
held out, but the truth itself. There must be earnestness and faith on
both sides.

The gospel has been carried to many nations, and will be preached to
all nations before the end comes. It will be readily understood that
the difficulties of missionary work are much increased when the gospel
is sent to nations where a foreign language to that of the preacher is
spoken, even if the laws are liberal enough to permit the Elder freely
to do his duty.

I labored in the Southampton (England) conference, as a traveling
Elder, in the years 1852 and 1853. I had labored in the north of
England and in the west of Scotland previously, and had seen hard
times, endured much and been the means of bringing a number to the
knowledge of the truth. The Southampton district, to which I had
been appointed when this brief history begins, consisted of the town
of Southampton and several smaller places convenient to visit, and
containing a number of faithful Saints.

In those days Elders sent to, or connected with, what was termed
"foreign missions," especially those of France, Switzerland and Italy,
were in the habit of sailing from and arriving at Southampton. I had
the pleasure there of making the acquaintance of such men as Andrew
Lamareaux, James H. Hart, Edward Stevenson, Nathan T. Porter, T. B. H.
Stenhouse, Jabez Woodward, S. L. Balliff and others. Elders Lamareaux
and Woodward died in the faith of the gospel. Bro Stenhouse, although
a capable man, was proud and fell from the ranks of the righteous. The
remaining four named have continued their usefulness unwaveringly,
and are brighter and better with the passing years. They often rested
at Southampton and enjoyed the hospitality of the ever-kind Saints of
that place. Their conversation was interesting as, like the old warrior
who, in his stories, fought his battles o'er again, they related their
experience and told of the habits and customs of strange peoples, and
of the difficulties they encountered in establishing the gospel in
distant lands, and of the kindness of those whom they were instrumental
in bringing into the light and influence of the Spirit of God.

The Elders engaged in the British mission did not covet a foreign
mission, although, probably, not one of them would have hesitated a
moment about going if he had been sent. I never knew of one refusing,
and I was as well acquainted with our missionaries, personally and
otherwise, I believe, as any one man from 1850 to 1860. As I observed,
the Elders did not naturally desire a mission that made necessary
the learning of another language, and the meeting of other serious
hindrances and, oftentimes, suffering and imprisonment on account of
prejudice and illiberal laws. I had such feelings; and, in consequence
of being acquainted with so many that were connected with missions on
the continent, felt sometimes a little uneasy, like Elders at home who
think it probable that they may be "called" at conference time. I was,
however, ready to go if called.

My labors in the Southampton conference were greatly blessed. I
had the pleasure of baptizing quite a number of people, and I am
thankful in knowing that many of them are, to-day, faithful Saints in
Zion. While laboring here, I was instructed by the president of the
mission to prepare to go to the Shetland Islands; but, after further
consideration, and especially in consequence of the favorable season of
the year being so far gone, it was concluded to let the matter rest.

Early in 1854 I was sent to labor in the Norwich conference where I
enjoyed my labors very much. I still thought, sometimes, of foreign
missions, but now all thoughts of the French, German and Italian
languages which there had been, in my mind, some danger of my having
to learn, were forgotten, as there was now no opportunity of my coming
into contact with foreign missionaries traveling to or from their
fields of labor.

In July, 1854 I received instructions to labor in Cambridge, one of the
ancient seats of learning, and now a city of colleges.

My mission here embraced, as a special work, the distribution of our
Church tracts among the professors and students; and my experience
in this labor, if not always pleasant, was exceedingly profitable
to me, arising from the necessity of preparing myself to answer
questions, give explanations and to cultivate the virtues of patience
and long-suffering. I persisted in the labor, however, and, in time,
enjoyed it. Although there was less apparent good done in adding to the
Church than in any former field of labor, I endeavored, with the help
of God, to do my duty while I remained in that hardened city. One day
I was resting at the conference house in Cambridge, when a letter came
for me from Liverpool which contained the following appointment:

 "TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN:--

"This is to certify that Elder William Budge is hereby appointed to
 labor under presidency of Elder Daniel Tyler, president of the Swiss
 and Italian missions of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
 Saints," etc., etc.

It was signed by President Franklin D. Richards who then presided over
the branches of the Church in the British Isles and adjacent countries.
That foreign mission, at last!

The reception of that appointment brought with it, to me, one of the
strongest evidences of the divinity of this work: it brought the spirit
of my new mission with it. As I finished the reading of the letter
my feelings were entirely changed. I was both ready and willing, and
was not satisfied until I procured a work on German, and had actually
started on my journey to Switzerland.

Elder Samuel Francis, now of Morgan County, Utah, as stated in a letter
accompanying my appointment, was also called at the same time to the
same mission. On my way to join him I spent one night in London. In
the evening I attended a meeting in one of the branches. Years after
I had the honor of presiding over the London Conference, but this was
the first meeting I ever attended in the great city. We had a good
time, the Spirit being poured out bountifully upon us. Several Elders
spoke, and one, referring to my going to Switzerland, prophesied
before the people that I would yet preside over the British Mission.
I was astonished, and thought that perhaps my brother's zeal and good
feelings had controlled his tongue; but, by the direction of our
Heavenly Father through His servants, after the lapse of twenty-four
years, it did surely come to pass.

Brother Francis received me kindly at Brighton, where he labored. He
had, for a companion, a book entitled "French Without a Master," and
I noticed he often consulted it. He told me he had been "reading up"
and had made some progress. I had not had time to "read up" much, and,
consequently, my progress was not worth mentioning; but I felt consoled
somewhat when I thought how convenient it would be to have a companion
who could act as interpreter on our journey through France. We sailed
from New Haven for Dieppe on the 28th of September, 1854. The voyage
was not a long one, but the sea was troubled so much that, during
part of the time, we did not think a great deal about either French
or German, with, or without, a master. As we drew near the shores of
France, we thought it necessary to make some inquiry about the Custom
House and passport regulations. Bro. Francis made some advances in
French to a Frenchman, but the party addressed, evidently, did not know
much about "book French," as spoken by my esteemed companion. Long
after this I found that the provincial natives of a country frequently
speak a corruption of the language and are not familiar with the
language proper when spoken. It was agreeable to us to think that this
Frenchman might be one of that class.

We landed, had our baggage examined in the Custom House and were passed
out into the street, strangers in a strange land. We were anxious to
find the railway station and Bro. Francis at once brought his "French
Without a Master" to light. He stopped and endeavored to get up a
conversation with two different natives whom he met on the street,
but, unfortunately, they were not "up" in their education and we were
obliged to go back to the ancient and barbarous language of signs,
although my companion's perseverance was worthy of greater success.

After stopping several hours in Paris and Macon we arrived at Geneva,
the headquarters of the Swiss and Italian Mission, in good health
and spirits; but before entering the city the police stopped our
_diligence_  (stage) and collected our passports. They were taken into
the police office in the city, where they were kept until the owner
concluded to travel further; but, in the meantime, that is, next day,
we were furnished with a permit, intended to save us from annoyance if
the police should take special notice of us.

Our brethren met and welcomed us. They were Elders T. B. H. Stenhouse,
president of the mission, although about to leave, having been released
to gather with the Church, Daniel Tyler, his successor, George Mayer,
J. F. Secrist, G. D. Keaton, C. R. Savage and John Chislett.

On Sunday, October 1st, we met in general conference, which lasted
three days, where we had a time of rejoicing together. At this
conference Elder Francis was appointed to labor in Italy among the
Waldenses who speak French; and I was appointed to labor under the
direction of Elder Mayer in the Zurich Conference, a portion of
Switzerland where the people speak German. It was with regret that I
parted with my intelligent companion, Brother Francis. I heard from him
at intervals afterwards; and, in the course of time and changes, under
the providences of God, we met again in England to labor together in
the Birmingham district.

Geneva, although not the capital of the Swiss Confederation, is its
principal city. It has now a population of about fifty thousand. Nearly
four thousand of these are employed in the manufacture of watches and
jewelry. The city, situated on the southern end of the lake of the
same name, presents a majestic appearance; the hills beyond and around
forming a beautiful prospect.



CHAPTER II.

ARRIVAL IN BERNE--ITS PRINCIPAL OBJECTS OF INTEREST--GO
TO WEININGEN, WHERE I REMAIN TO STUDY GERMAN--SKETCH
FROM MY JOURNAL--HUNTED BY MOBS--INTERVIEWED
BY THE MAYOR.

On October the 4th I left Geneva with Elder Mayer for our field of
labor. We sailed about thirty miles on the lake and then had a short,
pleasant walk to Lausanne. This place has a population of twenty-eight
thousand; it is the capital of the canton De Vaud, and is a very
attractive place of residence.

At 3 p.m. we took our seats on the _diligence_  and were soon
traveling along towards Berne, the capital city of the Swiss republic,
where we arrived at 5 o'clock on the following morning.

Berne has now a population of about forty thousand. It is the capital
of the canton as well as of the nation. It is built on the River Aar.
Numerous quaint and ornamental fountains decorate its streets; but
the buildings are dull and heavy-looking, the windows being generally
small. It is what might be called an old-fashioned place. The city
derives its name from the word _baren,_  the German for bears. The
figure of that interesting animal is conspicuous everywhere, on town
gates, fences and houses. For centuries living bears have been kept
at the public expense. The Bear Pit is one of the places of interest
about Berne, as there is generally, in fine weather, a number of
people collected there to enjoy the antics of the imprisoned animals.
An Englishman fell into this pit on the night of the 3rd of March,
1861, and was torn to pieces after a desperate struggle. There are
many interesting places about this remarkable old town. It has a fine
old cathedral, built in the sixth century, with an organ, justly
celebrated, said to be about equal to that of Fribourg, another town in
Switzerland. The Fribourg organ has sixty-seven stops and one thousand
eight hundred pipes, some of the latter being thirty-two feet long.
There are also a museum, palace, hospital and other objects of interest.

Our next stage was to the town of Baden where we took train to
Schlieren, and then walked to the village of Weiningen, about six miles
from Zurich, the principal city of the German portion of Switzerland.

There was a small branch of the Church at this place, and it was
designed that I should reside here for a time to commence my study
of German. On reaching Bro. Hug's house we were received in the most
friendly manner, and soon had some refreshment of which we stood in
need. At night a prayer meeting was held in the house. I much enjoyed
the spirit which prevailed, but understood not a word. The sound of
speaking seemed to be continuous, and it was impossible for me to catch
the beginning or end of a word or sentence. The Saints here numbered,
in all, fifteen or sixteen, the fruits of the labors of Elder George
Mayer who lives now, I believe, in Utah County.

On the 6th, Bro. Mayer went to Zurich and I was left with my Swiss
friends and my books.

The family with whom I lived showed me every kindness. How strange it
is when a person cannot make known his thoughts, nor understand people
when they talk! The very sound of German was harsh to me; but I soon
got accustomed to it.

I soon learned that the authorities of Switzerland were very suspicious
of anything like a gathering of the people and, therefore, all we did
had to be kept very quiet. I did not attract much notice, however,
because I was kept very busy in my endeavors to acquire the language.

In my journal I find the following:

"November the 25th. For some considerable time past the inhabitants
 of Weiningen have been lying against the Saints, and the spirit
 of persecution has been increasing. The village minister has been
 lecturing against the 'Mormons' and made the people worse. For the
 last two or three days they have been threatening to put a stop to
 'Mormonism,' and they commenced in the following manner:

"About eight o'clock this evening, while Bro. Henry Hug was gone
 to baptize two persons, a crowd gathered around the house, railing
 and swearing against us. They forced open the window shutters and,
 at length, entered the outer entrance of the house where several of
 the brethren had gone to speak to them. The mob would not listen,
 but forced their way into the room, beating back the brethren; we
 were trying, in the meantime, to prevent them. The mob being more
 particularly in search of Elder Mayer or myself, gave a howl of
 satisfaction when they perceived me. Bro. Mayer was not in the place
 and several men instantly laid hold of me and soon dragged me to the
 door. The brethren, seeing this, made another effort and succeeded
 in rescuing me, when a general fight began as well as it could be
 maintained by seven or eight persons against forty or fifty, that
 being the number that could come into the apartment. At this stage
 of the proceedings the small light that stood upon a table was
 extinguished and we were in sudden darkness, which at once put an end
 to hostilities. The thought had just passed through my mind that if
 I could make my escape it would save the property in the house from
 destruction, and the people from this riotous mob. As soon as we were
 in darkness Sister Ragela Hug whispered to me to follow her; I did
 so and, by some crowding and caution, we reached the hall doorway,
 when a man got hold of me by the hair. I quickly gave him a dig in
 the stomach with my elbow which as quickly caused him to let go his
 hold; but he gave the alarm. It was, however, too late: we had gained
 the back room, which we entered and bolted the door inside. I had but
 time to unfasten a window and leap from it to the ground before the
 crowd issued from the doors, both in the front and back of the house.
 I ran a short distance, then stood and listened, but, hearing no one
 pursuing, I went into the orchard and drew near the house again, as
 I wished to know whether the mob had left the house, for if they had
 I expected the Saints would be safe from further trouble. When near
 enough I heard the men searching for me in the out houses; so I turned
 and walked into Zurich, which place I reached about 2 o'clock in the
 morning, my body bruised, my head uncovered and my clothes very much
 torn. I went to Elder Baer's house and was soon admitted, had some
 refreshments and went to bed and slept soundly.

"The next day Elder Baer went to Weiningen and I spent the day with
 Elder Mayer and the Saints at the meetings. In the evening Elder
 Baer returned and told us that Bro. Henry Hug, while baptizing on
 the previous evening, was interrupted by a portion of the mob that
 had annoyed us. He was smitten on the face and taken before the
 authorities, first at Weiningen and then at Zurich; and was kept in
 prison all night. Also that, after I had left Weiningen, the brethren
 and some of the crowd did some fighting, but there was no one hurt
 much. Thus the Lord once more delivered us out of the hands of our
 enemies."

Only a few days elapsed after these events before I was summoned
to appear before the _Stadthalter_  (mayor) who, by the aid of an
interpreter, examined me at considerable length, the substance of which
I insert here as complete as possible:

QUESTION.--How old are you?

ANSWER.--Twenty-six years old.

Q.--Where were you born?

A.--In Lanark, Scotland.

Q.--Did you ever follow any business, if so, what was it?

A.--I was engaged at an inn, and afterwards in the boot and shoe
business.

Q.--Where did you come from to this country?

A.--From Cambridge, England.

Q.--Were you long in England?

A.--About three years and a half.

Q.--In what part?

A.--In many parts.

Q.--Had you property left you?

A.--No.

Q.--Then you made some money by your business?

A.--Yes, while engaged in it.

Q.--Did you follow any business while traveling in England?

A.--Yes.

Q.--What?

A.--Lecturing.

Q.--On politics or religion?

A.--Religion.

Q.--What did you come to this country for, and what have you been doing
since you came here?

A.--I came here partly to learn the German language, and to give
lessons in English, and I have been doing so since I came.

Q.--How long is it since you came into Switzerland?

A.--I came into Switzerland on the last day of September.

Q.--Into what part?

A.--Geneva.

Q.--Are you a believer in the doctrine of the people called Mormons?

A.--Yes, sir.

Q.--As it is taught in this country?

A.--I do not yet understand the language of this country.

Q.--But you believe the doctrines?

A.--Yes, those that I understand.

Q.--Have you taken any active part in Mormonism in this country?

A.--Of course not; I have just said I was ignorant of the language.

Q.--Do you believe in the plurality of wives as being true?

A.--Yes, sir.

Q.--Have you taught it to the people here?

A.--I cannot convey my thoughts or belief to the people, as I have not
mastered the language sufficiently.

Q.--Have you any desire that the people here should believe the
doctrine of plurality of wives?

A.--I would rejoice in knowing that all people believed in the Bible.

Q.--Do you believe that the Bible teaches that doctrine?

A.--Yes, most certainly; any one who believes the Bible must believe
that doctrine. (I here offered to explain it from scripture, but was
informed that they did not interfere with the faith of any man, and
that everyone had a right to draw their own conclusions from the Bible;
but he, the _Stadthalter,_  wished to know if I desired to see that
doctrine put in operation in Switzerland, to which I replied in the
negative.)

Q.--Why not?

A.--Because the people are not prepared for such a state of things, and
it would be unlawful.

Q.--Yes, but if you had the power, would you not introduce the practice
of that system?

A.--No.

Q.--Why?

A.--I have no desire to do anything against the spirit of the laws as
at present established. Again, I have no right to introduce such a
state of things: I never received authority from God, who is the Author
of the Bible religion, to do such a thing; so that, if I had the power,
I have not the disposition to do so in this country or any other.

Q.--Do you know Mr. Mayer?

A.--Yes, sir.

Q.--How long have you know him?

A.--Since I came to this country.

Q.--Did you not know him before?

A.--No, sir.

Q.--How did you become acquainted with him?

A.--I met him at the house of a friend.

Q.--In what place?

A.--In Geneva.

Q.--Will you give us the address of that friend?

A.--Certainly, you can have it; but I may mention that my friend [A]
left Geneva for America nearly two months ago. (The authorities here
showed some dissatisfaction at the nature of my last communication.)

Q.--Is Mr. Mayer an American?

A.--I never asked him, but I believe he is.

[Footnote A:  Elder T. B. H. Stenhouse, who had been released.]

Q.--Do you know what business he followed before he came to Switzerland?

A.--No, I knew nothing of him.

Q.--Did you ever tell the people here that by paying a certain sum of
money, or as much as they could, they might obtain a passage to America?

A.--I know nothing of such an arrangement; besides, I have repeatedly
stated to you that I cannot speak German well enough to explain
anything.

Q.--Do you know anything of such a matter among the Mormons here?

A.--No, I do not. [B]

The _Stadthalter_  now advised me to continue to abstain from
taking any active part with the "Mormons" as, perhaps, I was not aware (not
being able to read the public newspapers) to what extent the people
were excited against "Mormonism," and told me I would be sent for in
about a week to obtain the necessary papers to stay in Zurich, as it
was dangerous for me to remain longer in Weiningen. Thus ended my
first examination, and for the next two weeks I heard nothing from the
authorities; but rumors were prevalent that the "Mormons" were about to
be expelled.

[Footnote B:  In being questioned about emigration, the object was to
convict us of receiving the people's money by making promises which
we could not fulfill. Any one, of course, could secure a passage to
America by paying the necessary amount. The laws of Switzerland did not
prevent emigration.]



CHAPTER III.

LETTER FROM ELDER SECRIST--ORDERED TO LEAVE ZURICH--ARRESTED
AND IMPRISONED IN A FILTHY DUNGEON--TAKEN
TO BETTER QUARTERS--RELEASED.

About this time I received letters from several of the brethren in
other parts the mission, from which I learned that we in Zurich were
not the only ones who were being persecuted. From Bro. Secrist's
letter, written at St. Louis, France, I copy the following:

 "You may think it strange to hear from me, an outcast (not on the
 island of Patmos, but in the kingdom of France) for the testimony
 of the truth and of the gospel, which we preach. I hardly know how
 to begin my history. I left Geneva sick, yet complained little. It
 was with much difficulty and distress of body that I arrived at a
 good sister's house in Thun, where I had a severe time for about
 three days. About one week after, President Tyler came to see me.
 We ordained three to the Priesthood. I kept myself hidden from
 strangers, and traveled from place to place after night, and as the
 Saints are very much scattered, frequently walked twelve miles after
 dark. I felt after a time that something was not right, and as the
 reigning _Stadthalter_  wished to see me to learn from me concerning
 our doctrine, I went to see him. About this time he received a note
 from Berne, stating that 'Secrist had left the canton and if he were
 to show himself, to see after him and send him to Berne,' yet he (the
 _Stadthalter_) gave me the privilege of going to Berne by myself,
 instead of sending me by a policeman.

"I went, expecting to get a hearing, but this was denied me. They
 wished to know where I wanted to go. I answered to Thun. They replied,
 'You cannot go to Thun,' and got into a passion and sent me to prison,
 where I remained nine days. The brethren did all they could for me
 to get the authorities to hear me, stating that the preacher at
 Siglerswyl (who complained against me) did not represent the thing
 as it was. They had encouragement to have a re-hearing for me, till
 last Friday. They had petitioned testifying that I had not brought a
 strange doctrine in the land, etc., but all to no purpose; in short,
 on last Saturday morning, I was transported by a policeman, and never
 got clear until at the dividing line of Switzerland and France."

I first made the acquaintance of Elder Jacob F. Secrist in Geneva,
and found him to be a very humble and devoted missionary. He had just
commenced to lay the foundation of a permanent work in Berne and Thun
(a town some fifteen miles distant from the former) where he had by
the blessing of God, after enduring many hardships, baptized a number
of good people and established one or two branches. He was honorably
released to return to Zion, but did not live to enjoy the happiness of
a re-union with his family in this life, as he died somewhere in the
States on his way home.

For four or five weeks during these exciting times I kept no journal,
as it was not prudent under the circumstances to do so. In a country
where a man may be arrested and imprisoned at any movement, as we then
expected to be, and without a knowledge, on his part, of any charge
being made against him, it was not safe to write and carry evidence of
one's movements and connections. Although there was nothing wrong about
our acts or intentions, as our only desire was to remain that we might
teach our brethren and sisters and preach the gospel, as required by
the revelations of God; we wished to avoid bringing trouble on others,
if we had to feel the effects of prejudice and persecution.

About this time Elder C. R. Savage, now of Salt Lake City, whose field
of labor was at Lausanne, visited us. I was greatly pleased to see
him. He was an old acquaintance, as we had been fellow-laborers in the
Southampton conference in England.

While daily expecting to hear from the police-authorities, we occupied
all the time we could in straightening up Church records and accounts
of Church books received from and sent to different places, which was
somewhat difficult as we had to estimate values in different kinds of
money.

As the time passed, Elder Mayer was busy visiting and preaching to the
Saints and strangers, who attended our meetings, and I assisted him to
the best of my ability. I had studied hard and was steadily improving
in a knowledge and use of the German tongue. We anticipated trouble
from the authorities, in consequence of rumors prevailing, but we
trusted in the Lord who had sent us to warn this nation, and we waited
with confidence coming events.

About December 16th, Elder Mayer and myself received notice from the
police to leave the canton of Zurich within eight days. Elder Mayer
made application to the American consul, who would do nothing for him,
and I wrote to the British ambassador at Berne. In my communication
I claimed protection as a British subject and stated how I had been
treated by the authorities of the canton in which I then was, they even
refusing to give any reason for the unjust course pursued in regard to
me.

He gave an almost immediate reply in which he stated that he had asked
for explanation concerning the course pursued towards me, and had also
used his influence to have the order of banishment suspended for a
time. He then asked me to write him fully, as I afterwards did, any and
all causes which I might think had led to the action of the authorities.

Elder Mayer, as the American consul would do nothing for him, had to
leave and was shortly afterwards honorably released to return home to
Zion: and notwithstanding my protest, the act of expulsion against
me remained in force and I had also to leave or go to prison, and
remembering the advice of the ambassador, to comply with the orders
of the police until the matter was fully investigated, I concluded to
comply with the requisition.

Brother Mayer was the first missionary sent to Zurich in this
dispensation. He was an example of industry and perseverance in his
ministry and was the means of accomplishing a great deal of good. He
baptized quite a number and organized a branch of the Church in Zurich
and another in Weiningen. He left, carrying with him the blessings and
good feelings of both Saints and strangers who knew him.

I concluded, waiting the final issue of the ambassador's negotiations,
to remove to Badan in a neighboring Catholic canton. Brother Savage,
who could not speak German, decided to go with me for a few days before
returning to his field of labor in Lausanne. The grief of the Saints
was visible on every countenance, they felt discouraged, it seemed to
them that, in the departure of the Elders, the last link connecting
them with the body of the Church was about to be severed and that they
were soon to be left without a shepherd.

The excitement about the "Mormons" had been considerable, the
newspapers, as usual, printing all manner of falsehoods concerning us
and those of Zurich printing a notice of our expulsion and advising the
authorities in neighboring cantons to look after us. The Protestant
cantons manifested their opposition to us the most, and the excitement
among them was general. The Catholic cantons showed little interest in
the matter, therefore we thought it best to take refuge in one of them.

Extremely little has ever been accomplished by the Elders among a
Roman Catholic population, in consequence of the dense ignorance, in
a general sense, of the mass of the people and their unwillingness
to examine anything religious apart from their own faith--the
result doubtless of an education which shackles thought and crushes
out aspirations which would lead to religious freedom. A few days
experience, surrounded by an unfriendly influence, inclined us to
accept an invitation to visit a family of Saints in Weiningen, the same
with whom I had lodged at a former period and in whose house I had been
mobbed. That place was, however, within the boundaries of the canton of
Zurich and therefore dangerous to our liberty. We had been considering
the propriety of Brother Savage returning to Lausanne and my going into
one of the other Protestant cantons where there were a few scattered
Saints, but I thought it would be better to reserve my visit in that
direction until the excitement was somewhat allayed that I might be
able to remain for a season.

At this juncture the invitation reached us from Weiningen. Our friends
promised us the utmost secrecy and care, as they, of course, understood
that I had been banished and was in danger, if found in the canton. I
finally concluded to go to Weiningen, and as the distance was short
Brother Savage accompanied me. We got within two or three miles of
our destination as it was getting dark, and, as arranged, were met by
two of the brethren who came to pilot us into town in safety. On our
arrival at Brother Hug's residence we were met by kind friends whose
glad countenances testified to the happiness they felt at beholding
us. Supper was ready and we all sat down to partake of the blessings
provided by this kind family when suddenly the door was thrust open and
a policeman, with several assistants, walked into the room and arrested
Brother Savage and myself.

They next proceeded to relieve us of such things as our pockets
contained, all the while asking questions which we did not answer, and
congratulating each other upon the capture they had made. I had quite
a sum of mission money in large silver pieces which I intended to send
to Geneva by Brother Savage. As our visitors commenced to relieve us of
such articles as we had, the Hug brothers (there were several of them)
interposed, which led to considerable wrangling, when I thought of the
money, and backing against brother Jacob Hug, drew nearly all of the
money out of my pocket, unobserved, and, as I thought, put the money
into his, but the outside opening of his trousers led down his leg as
well as into his pocket, and, unfortunately, in the hurry the money
went the wrong way, making a noise and scattering all over the floor.
The police, amazed, cleared the floor and picked up most of the coin.
Brother Jacob Hug claimed the money, however, and as the police could
not prevail upon me to own it, Brother Jacob had it returned to him
the next day. Without partaking of the good supper which had been set
before us we were escorted to temporary quarters for the night at the
house of a village policeman. On the way a remark was made by one of us
when we were at once ordered not to speak. We were placed in a large
room and against the door inside was pushed a heavy table, on which
were placed a loaded musket, a bottle of wine and a loaf of bread. The
contents of the first for us if we attempted to escape, and of the two
latter for the benefit of the policeman and his assistant, who sat up
all night to take care of us.

Our guards felt elated over their wine and our capture, the
circumstances connected with which seemed to please them very much. I
wondered how our arrival in the village was known, and so soon, but
learned all about it from the conversation that took place between
them. Some persons had accidentally seen us meet the brethren who came
to guide us into the village.

Not having answered their questions when they arrested us, they took it
for granted that we did not understand German, so they spoke freely.
The policeman pointing to me said, "That is a fine fellow, he used to
pretend to give English lessons, how could he, when he cannot speak any
German?"

We were hungry, at least I was, and supposed Brother Savage was also.
I dared not ask him as we might have been separated, but when it grew
late and there was no sign of anything for us to eat, I distinctly
asked in German if we were to have any supper. The effect of this very
natural request was most remarkable. The policeman sprang to his feet
and without a word walked over to where I sat, put his fist to my face
and hissed out the word, "I thought you could not speak German."

I replied, "O yes, I can sometimes."

"Then why did you not answer me in Mr. Hug's house?" he asked.

I answered, "Because I did not choose to do so."

He was very angry and appeared ready to strike me, but he thought
better of it and walked back to his seat, stating that we would get no
supper. Just at this time his wife looked in at the door and with great
kindness plead with him to allow her to give us something to eat, but
he would not. He at length got up and offered me a piece of crust of
the bread in a very surly manner, which I declined. I then told him
we were ready to go to bed. He pointed to the floor and said we might
lie there, but his wife again interfered in our behalf, and after
considerable sharp talk on her part, as well as his, she was permitted
to bring in a bed and bed clothes, when we lay down and spent the night
very comfortably, as we were tired.

Early in the morning we were ordered to get up, and without breakfast
and marched to Zurich, six miles distant. Like Brother Secrist, we
had to go before, the policeman walking behind with his musket over
his shoulder. As we reached Zurich our procession attracted the
attention of the citizens, and, before we reached the jail, had quite a
following. At the jail Brother Savage and I were separated. I was taken
to an underground cell and locked in. Its size was about eight feet by
six, with one small window on a level with the street; but worst of
all, the cell was abominably dirty. The furniture consisted of a narrow
bench and one or two old rugs, the place being used to confine persons
in temporarily, until they were taken away for trial. During the day
a number of prisoners were unceremoniously pushed in and shortly
afterwards taken away again, and although most of them were anything
but pleasant companions, the changes made broke the monotony of the
long prison hours. They were all hand-cuffed and some looked as if it
were a very proper precaution. Some were bound with great severity and
begged me, as soon as we were alone, to adjust the small chain which
was round their wrists, in the hope of obtaining relief.

As the day wore on the polluted atmosphere of the cell sickened me. The
foulness of the place was beyond description, the very walls as high as
a man could reach were covered with filthiness. I grew tired, as there
was no resting place, being on my feet all day, and hungry, as I had
not eaten anything for about thirty hours. At seven o'clock at night
I was taken out of the den and brought before my former acquaintance,
the _Stadthalter,_  with whom I had quite a friendly conversation,
more seeking information on his part than as an examination. I complained
bitterly about the place of my confinement, which I think had not
been known to him, and he told me that he would send me to a more
comfortable place; he also said he did not desire to punish or expel
me, but he was obliged to meet the wishes of the priests, whose
influence was very great. A policeman was now ordered to take me to new
quarters.

How fresh and invigorating was the air when we stepped out into the
street! The extreme pleasure in some degree compensated me for what I
had endured. I walked alongside of my new conductor until we reached a
prison situated in the upper part of town, where I was received by the
jailor and introduced to four genteel looking young men, who occupied
two rooms in the building. My new friends were quite pleased to see me,
and, bringing up their seats close to mine, inquired in a friendly and
confidential way "what I was in for." I told them it was for preaching,
which caused them to look at each other rather dubiously, as much as
to say, "that story won't do," but I afterwards explained matters more
fully, and I think satisfied them with the facts.

There were two beds in one room and one in the other, all clean and
neat, although made every morning by the prisoners themselves, this
labor being one of the duties of the prisoners. My companions desired
me to occupy the single bed while they occupied the two in the other
room. This was kind and acceptable, and before I lay down I rejoiced
in expressing my great thanks to God, the giver of all good, for His
kindness unto me, and in so ordering, that I had an opportunity of
sleeping in peace. Indeed, although it may seem strange, I was grateful
for the privilege, of resting from the anxiety and suspense to which
I had so long been subjected. It was a kind of relief to be in prison
under the circumstances, especially as I felt that I had done all the
good my opportunities permitted, although there were some serious
doubts in my mind as to when I might obtain my freedom.

It should be remembered that in Switzerland then, and in other European
countries, a man might be imprisoned on suspicion at any time, without
any certainty as to when he might be liberated. I slept well, and
arose early, agreeable with our prison regulations. Our first work was
bed-making, which had to be done well, as it was afterwards inspected.
It was here I took my first lesson in that domestic labor, and as I
appeared awkward in my first movements, one of my companions kindly
offered to assist me. My companions were all respectable-looking and
well-dressed young men, and supported by the canton, as they told me,
for stealing. Three had been hotel waiters. They were cheerful and
entertaining, and, during the time I remained with them, treated me
with the utmost consideration. One of them, a mimic, diverted us daily
with exhibitions of the walk and social manners of men of different
nationalities, which were exceedingly good and helped to pass away the
time, and I, when opportunities offered and sometimes at their own
request, encouraged them to live a better life, and taught them some of
the principles of the gospel.

There was one serious trouble; we were always hungry, being only half
fed. Our meals were served with due regularity, and consisted of a
little gruel and a small portion of bread for breakfast, of potatoes
and sometimes sour krout with a very small piece of meat for dinner,
and gruel and bread, as a change, for supper, but not half enough at
any time. No matter what position we occupied, or what we were doing,
as soon as the key rattled in the door about meal times we were on the
alert and ready. I had spent four days and three nights in prison, when
one day the jailor came in at an unusual time and said, "Mr. Budge, you
are at liberty to go." I was not told why I was imprisoned, nor why
I was set at liberty, and I asked no questions, but, taking leave of
my companions, walked out into the street a free man. I found Brother
Savage at liberty. The Saints had only that morning learned where we
were in custody. Brother Savage, after the first day's imprisonment,
had been obliged to consort with vile characters and in addition to
other inconveniences had to endure the noise of their riotous conduct.
In a day or two he left for Lausanne, expressing the natural kindliness
of his disposition towards me and wishes for my safety, as I thought it
best to remain in Zurich, at least until I received another notice to
leave.

There was still no news from Berne with regard to myself, although
I looked for immediate results after the dispatch of my last letter
to the ambassador, and I continued to attend meetings and instruct
the people, taking special pains to inform them in regard to the
organization of the Church and the jurisdiction of the Priesthood
in its varied callings, foreseeing the probability of their being
left to themselves, at least for a time. I was naturally in a state
of suspense, although the authorities made no new movement. I moved
about very quietly among the Saints and others, subjecting myself to
such inconveniences as were necessary to enable me to do my duty, the
newspapers in the meantime still keeping the people in a state of
excitement about the "Mormons."



CHAPTER IV.

PROGRESS IN LEARNING TO SPEAK GERMAN--COMMUNICATION
FROM THE BRITISH AMBASSADOR--NOTIFIED TO
LEAVE ZURICH--GO TO SCHAFFHAUSEN--THE FALLS OF
THE RHINE--UNABLE TO OBTAIN PERMISSION TO REMAIN
IN THE CANTON--SEEK ANOTHER PLACE OF RETREAT--LODGE
WITH A FAMILY OF SAINTS--DIFFICULTY IN KEEPING
SECLUDED--CALLED TO GENEVA--RETURN TO ENGLAND.

The Saints in Zurich and vicinity were enjoying much of the Holy Spirit
and rejoicing greatly in the faith of the gospel of Jesus Christ;
they were beginning to comfort themselves with hopes that I might be
permitted, after all, to remain among them unmolested; and I was, under
the blessing of God, making such progress in conversation as encouraged
me in hopes of being still more useful, when at length I received the
following communication from the British ambassador:

 "BERNE, JANUARY 11, 1855.

 "Sir:--I have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 20th
 ult., and of your passport transmitted to me therein.

"The information conveyed in that letter, that you belonged to the
 sect denominated 'Mormons,' and the indication it contained that you
 were in the habit of preaching its doctrines, alike revolting and
 opposed to civilization and religion, led me to anticipate the results
 of my application to the Federal Council for explanation as to the
 motive of your threatened expulsion from the canton of Zurich. But
 having requested such an explanation at the hands of the authorities
 here. I thought it right to allow the matter to take its course and
 I therefore waited until I should receive from the Federal Council
 a reply to the note I had written on the subject. This reply I only
 received yesterday morning and I was fully prepared for the tenor of
 its contents. These are in brief to the effect, that Mormonism has
 lately been on the increase in the canton of Zurich, and its preaching
 and ceremonial acts have given rise to disorders in one locality on
 account of their immoral tendency, so that the police had deemed it
 necessary to refuse to the two Mormon teachers permission to reside in
 the canton; that you are one of these teachers, that you have hitherto
 resided in the district without legal permission to do so, and that
 it is the refusal to grant you such permission (which is required
 by Zurich law for Swiss citizens as well as foreigners and may be
 refused by the authorities to any one on just causes) of which you now
 complain.

"It is further observed in the note of the Federal Council, that the
 Government of Zurich, considering that Budge belongs to the sect of
 the Mormons, and devotes himself to the propagation of their tenets,
 that among these is found polygamy--a state of things incompatible
 with the basis of social and family life in the above canton, and,
 lastly, that the preaching of these individuals has occasioned
 disorder, is of the opinion that the determination of the police of
 Zurich is fully justified.

"The Federal Council itself approves of this determination on the
 part of the Government of Zurich, and is of opinion that there are no
 grounds for any longer delay being allowed, previous to your being
 ordered to quit the canton. This decision was transmitted to Zurich by
 last night's post.

"Coinciding as I do in the estimate formed of the pernicious doctrines
 held and disseminated by you, according to your own admission in your
 letter to me of the 20th of December, and considering that a Swiss
 citizen acting in a similar manner would meet with precisely similar
 treatment, I can see that I should not be authorized in interfering in
 any way as the queen's representative here, to prevent the execution
 of the order of the Zurich authorities--that you should leave the
 canton immediately. If you will follow my recommendation you will
 comply quietly with the order you have received, and in selecting
 your destination, if you should still remain in Switzerland, you will
 do well to recollect that other cantons have the same laws in this
 respect as Zurich and that wherever you go it will be advisable for
 you to refrain from preaching doctrines, which, whatever may be your
 own belief, are abominated as in the highest degree blasphemous and
 immoral, by the whole civilized world. I retain your passport in case
 you should wish to have it signed by me, to render it valid for any
 particular route you may decide on taking, and I will transmit it to
 you on learning your intentions. I am, sir your obedient servant,

"G. V. R. GORDON,

"H. B. Majesty's Minister.

"To Mr. William Budge, Zurich."

The strong prejudice of the ambassador is very apparent in the opening
lines of his letter. The idea is conveyed, that he would not have
made any application at all on my behalf if he had known that I was
a "Mormon," that fact apart from the merits of the question at issue
would have been sufficient to cause him to neglect his duty as a
protector of his countrymen and their interests; but, having requested
such an explanation at the hands of the authorities, he "thought it
right to allow the matter to take its course." I thought as much when I
wrote my first letter, therefore made my protest urgent, and refrained
from introducing any religious consideration until he would commit
himself in an effort to do me justice.

The reply of the Federal Council as quoted, contained several
misrepresentations, but without them there would have been no showing
of necessity or consistency in expelling a stranger from a "free
republic." The disorders referred to were the acts of native mobocrats
without provocation, and there was no more immorality about the baptism
of believers into the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints than
the baptism of people into a Baptist community. It was not necessary to
refuse the two "Mormon teachers permission to reside in the canton," as
we had duly deposited our passports and met all requirements made upon
us by the authorities, and therefore did not ask for permission, which
we had long enjoyed.

In regard to polygamy, we did not teach it and had testified before the
authorities that we had no disposition or authority, even if we had
the power, to interfere with social life in the canton, by advising
the practice of our marriage views. It was true that "Mormonism"
was increasing and also the rage of the priests proportionately,
and as something had to be done to satisfy them, the rulers gave an
unrighteous decision, which was endorsed by a narrow-minded British
minister.

In a day or two after the ambassador's letter was received, I was
summoned before the police and received peremptory orders to leave the
canton in three days, or I would be arrested.

At last I was obliged to leave Zurich, and all our friends were full
of grief on account of the determination of the authorities to drive
us from the country. I had been pursuing my studies at all convenient
opportunities and was able now to teach the Saints with more freedom,
and since Elder Mayer's departure, the responsibility of the work in
this part of the mission had devolved upon me. The interest I felt in
the prosperity of the Saints was deep and abiding, and I sought the
help of the Lord to enable me to instruct them in those things which
were most necessary under the circumstances, feeling as we all did,
that I would probably soon leave them. I felt the importance of the
work being sustained in German Switzerland, so I determined to go no
further away than was absolutely necessary.

On January 16, 1855, I left Zurich for Schaffhausen, and arrived there
the next day, having walked part of the way. I had an introduction
from a sister to a family in this place on whom I called and by whom I
was kindly received, but it was necessary for me to obtain permission
to lodge with my friends; I therefore visited the police office and
explained that my passport was in the hands of the ambassador and would
reach me soon, and they concluded, "as an obligation," that I might
stay in town one night without it. On the second day of my arrival I
was summoned before the police and examined, and had to telegraph to
the ambassador, who replied that the passport was on the way, which for
the time prevented me, I suppose, from being locked up.

My passport arriving on the 20th, I went to the police office and
presented it, was closely questioned, and came to the conclusion
that there was not liberty enough to teach the truth in this place.
Schaffhausen is near the line between Switzerland and Germany, which
accounts for the unusual severity of its regulations. I was in hope of
doing some good, as the neighbors continued visiting my lodgings to
see and talk with the "Englishman," and smoke their pipes. In talking
we could hear, but it was with difficulty sometimes, when there were a
number present, to see each other through the smoke.

Near this city are the beautiful Rhine Falls which have a world-wide
reputation. I here introduce the following brief description of these
beautiful falls from a work lately published:

 "The falls of the Rhine, near Schaffhausen are among the largest in
 Europe. Though nothing in comparison with such falls as Niagara,
 they are imposing and beautiful. Shortly after passing the pretty
 town of Schaffhausen, the Rhine hastens, hurrying on for about three
 miles narrowed between woody knolls and low rocks. By these rocks, in
 the pass between Daschsen and Neuhausen, the river is divided into
 three shoots, which dash down a depth of about seventy feet. The
 spectacle of the falls is exceedingly fine on both banks, where every
 accommodation is equally made for visitors to enjoy the scene.

"A fine view of the falls is obtained from the garden of the castle
 of Laufen, on the left bank of the river. It is immediately opposite
 the Schweizerhof, from which visitors can cross in a ferry-boat, fare
 half a franc. The land belongs to a private family, but, by contract
 with the canton of Zurich, strangers are permitted to visit the castle
 and grounds; fee, one franc. A wooden balcony overhangs the rush
 of waters. The actual fall here is about eighty feet. The water's
 division into three shoots can be well seen. The largest body of water
 falls during the months of June and July. Although this, one of the
 finest falls in Europe, is not a Niagara, nevertheless the general
 landscape is superior to that in the vicinity of Niagara falls. The
 range of the Alps including Mont Blanc, distant 185 miles, can be seen
 from this point and this alone would form a feature of the place."

After remaining several days in Schaffhausen without any apparent
results, I went to Weingarten and called on a Brother Bonnelli, of whom
I had heard, and was received by the family with great kindness. This
brother took my passport to the village authority, and was surprised
when that dignitary questioned him closely and declared that I was
a "Mormon." He was angry with Brother Bonnelli for entertaining me,
but eventually sent a permit allowing me to lodge at their house and
retained my passport.

I visited and conversed with Saints and strangers for several days
in Weingarten when quite unexpectedly I was summoned before the
_Stadthalter,_  where I received my passport and a notice to leave
the canton of Thurgau in two days. The _Stadthalter's_  instructions
contained no reason therefore, but he informed me it was because I
was a "Mormon." It was the settled policy of the cantons to drive
the Elders out of the country, and the decision of the federal
government as given in my case, when expelled from Zurich, sustained
them. The papers published every movement made by the authorities,
and all strangers being obliged to deposit their passports at the
nearest office that they might be permitted to stay where they desired
to settle or lodge for the time, it was impossible to remain long
undiscovered. To lodge in any house without the legal permit, providing
the family were willing, subjected them to fine or imprisonment, and
this was not desirable. I fully considered the circumstances and
probabilities in the spirit of prayer and supplication to my Heavenly
Father that He might guide and preserve me in my efforts to remain in
Switzerland until His servants were satisfied with the efforts made
to sustain the Church and warn the people. It was true that President
Tyler had left the responsibility with me as to what I ought to do,
but I was not yet quite satisfied, and finally determined to return
to a small village on the Lake of Zurich, where a faithful family of
Saints resided and where I might live unknown for a season, except to
the family, in whom I had great confidence. How to get there was the
question to be solved. On receiving my passport, when asked where I was
going as was usual, I replied to St. Gall, such being my intention at
the time, and the endorsement was made accordingly, but on reflection
it was almost certain that my intention would be known in St. Gall
before I could get there myself. To go to Kussnacht (the village on the
lake), which was almost in an opposite direction to St. Gall, would
probably be fatal to my liberty if my passport should be examined.
My first movement from Weingarten towards my place of refuge would
also bring me into the canton of Zurich, from which I had been twice
expelled; but if I could spend one night on the journey safely, I had
strong hopes of making the trip without detection.

On the afternoon of the 14th of February I left Brother Bonnelli's
house with regret, as we were doing good and the prospect was
encouraging. It rained all day and was very muddy under foot. I
therefore concluded to remain for the night at a small town named Elgg.
It was evening. I walked into a respectable looking hotel and arranged
for supper and lodging. The people were obliging, but to save trouble
I concluded not to use any more German than a few words, such as any
traveler is supposed to pick up in a few days. After drying my clothes
a little, as they were wet through with rain, I sat down to supper. Men
were coming and going during the evening as is usual in such places on
the continent of Europe. They come to chat with their neighbors, read
the papers, smoke and drink beer. I noticed a man sitting at the table
opposite me. He had been there some time, although we had not spoken
to each other. The man at length said to the waiter--of course in
German--"You have a stranger here."

"Yes," the waiter replied, "an Englishman, but he cannot speak German."

That was satisfactory to me as I went on with my supper, but directly
after, the man looking over to me, said (in German), "You are an
Englishman, I believe?"

"Ein Englaender," I replied, wishing to break off the conversation,
when, to my astonishment, he addressed me in pretty good English. After
asking several questions which led to an agreeable conversation, he
informed me that he was the chief authority of the village, and then
requested to look at my passport, which I at once handed him, but as I
at the moment complimented him on the ease and fluency with which he
spoke English (which seemed to gratify him), he probably did not notice
that, according to the last endorsement which was written upon the
document, I should have been on my way to St. Gall. My friend returned
the passport good-naturedly, signifying his approval and stating that
my staying at the hotel for the night was all right.

I was up early the next morning and had breakfast, but it rained so
heavily that I was detained an hour or two at the inn. On this day's
journey I passed through Winterthur and reached Zurich, as I intended,
just as it became dark, and passed through to Kussnacht, distance
during the day twenty-seven miles, but the walking was heavy as the
roads were bad, and the snow was in many places over eighteen inches
deep. The kind reception which I met with from Brother and Sister
Elleker and family filled me with gratitude to God and to them, and I
had need of their attention as I was completely worn out. I remained
with this most excellent family until the eighth day of March, in the
strictest seclusion, except when visited by a brother occasionally,
from Zurich. The family were silk-ribbon weavers and had necessarily
occasional callers. My apartment was up-stairs, but it was lonesome,
and as there were no arrangements for warming the rooms, I went below
to the sitting room as often as I could with safety. In doing this
I had some narrow escapes from being seen, as to return to my room
it was necessary to pass through a passage-way in view of the front
door. It is a very difficult thing for a person to keep hid in a
country like this, for a stranger is readily observed, and had the
neighbors' suspicions been once awakened, my hours of liberty would
have been few, and my protectors brought into serious trouble. As is
common in many houses in Switzerland, Brother Elleker's sitting room
was warmed by an oven projecting out from the wall, the mouth of the
furnace being in another apartment. The projection was probably not
less than five by four feet, and in height reached from the floor to
within eighteen inches or two feet of the ceiling. This is covered
on the sides and end with enameled pottery ware. The heat from the
inside makes this oven a very desirable place to lean against in cold
weather. In addition to other uses the people dry chicory on the top
of the oven, which is flat, before grinding it to use instead of
coffee. At Brother Elleker's, one side of the oven was near the wall
of the house, leaving room for a number of narrow steps leading to the
top. These steps were a favorite resting-place for me, as by going up
a step or two I could not be seen, unless a visitor came well round
into the room; if one did or was likely to do so, I got on top of the
oven where I was entirely hid, as a curtain covered the space between
the top of the oven and the ceiling. A neighbor woman came in one day
whose movements were suspicious and I got on the top, but it happened
that the top was entirely covered with small pieces of chicory,
quite dry and, of course, very hard. There being no time to consider
comfort, I was quickly, hands and knees, on the ragged edges of the
dried root, and, to my consternation, from under the curtain I saw the
woman deliberately plant herself against the side of the oven. You may
imagine my condition, as the heat was oppressive and the chicory to my
feelings got every moment harder. Sister Elleker did her best to get
rid of her neighbor, without telling her to go, and when she succeeded
I came down the steps without the least approach to hilarity in my
disposition.

Shortly after arriving at Brother Elleker's I was in communication
with a few of the leading brethren in Zurich, and one at a time would
occasionally come and see me, the distance being only five or six
miles, and I availed myself of every opportunity to instruct them in
their duties. I also kept President Tyler acquainted occasionally with
my whereabouts and condition.

On March 8th I received a telegram from President Tyler, desiring
me to come to him at Geneva, which I at once prepared to do. I had
become somewhat uneasy, as the visits of the brethren, although made
with great caution, were being noticed by the neighbors, and I was
satisfied I could not at present forward the cause to any great extent,
not enough to justify the constant risk to myself and others. I and
other Elders had been in all the Protestant German cantons, but two or
three which we were not warranted in visiting, as they were strongly
prejudiced and only in name removed from the bigotry and bitterness of
Catholicism, and we had been expelled from, or prohibited from teaching
in all we had visited; and during the last three months I had been
summoned before the police authorities in different places no less than
thirteen times.

I bade my kind friends an affectionate farewell and blessed them for
their kindness and consideration which they had manifested towards me,
and in a few days was united with my brethren in Geneva again.

Brother Tyler had written to President F. D. Richards, at Liverpool,
in regard to my future labors, as there was no opening then in
Switzerland, suggesting that there might be an opportunity to open
up the work in Germany, but the result of the correspondence was the
decision that I should return to England for the present.

I remained in Geneva until the 20th of April, 1855, (expecting to take
a small party of Italian Saints from Lyons to Liverpool, on their way
to the valleys of Utah, but circumstances prevented their coming), when
I left for England by way of Dijon and Paris, where I duly arrived
after an absence of seven months.

With regard to the feelings of the Swiss nation, within the last thirty
years the policy of the government and the sentiment of the people have
undergone a great change in favor of liberty. In 1876, Elder J. U.
Stucki, then president of the Swiss and German Missions, was summoned
before a district judge for certain expressions relating to polygamy,
in a pamphlet which he had published, and he was fined fifty francs
and an order was made for the confiscation of the book. Elder Stucki
appealed to the supreme court of the canton (Berne) which confirmed the
decision of the lower court; but the decision of the judges not being
unanimous, Brother Stucki, encouraged, carried the case before the
supreme court of the nation which reversed the two former rulings--a
result which led to much inquiry by strangers and renewed prosperity
for the Church.

I visited Switzerland again in 1879, visiting Schaffhausen, Wienfelden,
Zurich, Berne and many other places, attending public meetings without
using a passport at all, although I had one with me.

Within the last few weeks, in answer to an application for the
repression of "Mormonism" in Berne Oberland (the district from which
Elder Secrist was expelled in 1854) the authorities declared in effect,
that the Latter-day Saints had as much right to preach their doctrines
as any other religious denomination had to expound theirs.



THE FAITH OF THE ZUNIS.

BY LLEWELLYN HARRIS.

TRADITIONS OF THE ZUNIS--THREE CHILDREN HEALED--ADMINISTER
TO 406 INDIANS WHO WERE ATTACKED WITH
THE SMALL-POX, MOST OF WHOM RECOVER--OPPOSED BY
A PRESBYTERIAN MINISTER AND OTHERS--FATE OF MY
OPPOSERS.

I arrived at the Zuni village on the 20th of January, 1878, on my way
to the Mexican settlements, to preach the gospel.

Circumstances caused me to stay at Zuni eight days, thus giving me an
opportunity to become acquainted with their traditions, customs and
history.

They say that, before the conquest of Mexico by the Spaniards, the Zuni
Indians lived in Mexico. Some of them still claim to be the descendants
of Montezuma. At the time of the conquest they fled to Arizona, and
settled there. They were at one time a very powerful tribe, as the
ruins all over that part of the country testify. They have always been
considered a very industrious people. The fact that they have at one
time been in a state of civilization far in advance of what they are at
present, is established beyond a doubt. Before the Catholic religion
was introduced among them, they worshiped the sun. At present they are
nearly all Catholics. A few of them have been baptized into our Church
by Brothers Ammon M. Tenney and R. H. Smith, and nearly all the tribe
say they are going to be baptized.

They have a great many words in the language like the Welsh, and with
the same meaning.

Their tradition says that over three hundred years before the conquest
of Mexico by the Spaniards, some white men landed in Mexico and told
the Indians that they had come from the regions beyond the sea to the
east. They say that from these white men came the ancient kings of
Mexico, from whom Montezuma descended.

These white men were known to the Indians of Mexico by the name of
_Cambaraga;_  and are still remembered so in the traditions of the
Zuni Indians. In time those white people became mixed with Indians, by
marriage, until scarcely a relic of them remained. A few traditions of
the Mexican Indians and a few Welsh words among the Zunis, Navajos, and
Moquises are all that can be found of that people now.

I have the history of the ancient Britons, which speaks of Prince
Madoc, who was the son of Owen Guynedd, king of Wales, having sailed
from Wales, in the year 1160, with three ships. He returned in the year
1163, saying he had found a beautiful country, across the western sea.

He left Wales again in the year 1164 with fifteen ships and three
thousand men. He was never again heard of.

The circumstances of the healing of the Indians who were affected with
the small pox, which occurred during my stay among the Zunis, are as
follows:

I put up with a Zuni Indian known as Captain Lochee, who had three
children sick with the small-pox. After I had been asleep two or
three hours, I was awakened by the cries of the family and some of
the neighbors who had come in. I arose and inquired the cause of the
crying, and was informed by Captain Lochee that his daughter, a child
of about twelve years of age, was dying. I saw she was gasping for
breath. I felt like administering to her then, but the Spirit of the
Lord prompted me to wait a little longer. I waited until she had done
gasping and did not appear to breathe. The Spirit of the Lord moved
upon me very strongly to administer to her, which I did; she revived
and slept well the remainder of the night. I also administered to the
other two who were sick in the same house that night. All was quiet the
remainder of the night, and all seemed much better in the morning. The
news of this spread through the town, and the next day I was called to
visit about twenty-five families, all of whom had one or more sick with
the small-pox. They also wished me to administer to the sick, which
I did. I was called upon to visit from ten to twenty families a day
for four days after my arrival, and administered to their sick. The
power of the Lord was made manifest to such a degree that nearly all I
administered to recovered. The disease was spreading so rapidly that I
was unable to visit all the houses. One morning about eight o'clock one
of the Zuni women came for me to go and visit the sick; she took me to
a house which had a large room in it, about twenty by forty feet. When
I entered the room I found they had gathered the sick from all parts of
the village, till they had completely filled the house. The stench that
arose and the horrible sight that met my eyes is beyond description.
They had a Spaniard there, who understood the Zuni language, for an
interpreter, who told me they wanted me to administer to all those who
were sick in the room. I being the only Elder in the village, it seemed
to be a great task to administer to so many, but I called on the Lord
to strengthen me. I commenced, and as fast as I administered to them
they were removed, but other sick ones were continually being brought
in. It was late in the afternoon before I could perceive that they
began to diminish in numbers. When I had administered to the last one
and went out, the sun had set and it was getting dark. The Spaniard who
had stayed there all day asked me if I knew how many I had prayed for.
I told him that I did not keep count; he said he had, and that it was
406. The next morning my arms were so sore that I could hardly move
them.

There was a Presbyterian minister in the village, who became jealous
of the influence I was gaining with the Indians. He persuaded two
Spaniards, one Navajo Indian, one albino Zuni, and one of the Zuni
medicine men to circulate lies and frighten the Zunis, telling them
that those who were healed were healed by the power of the devil.

I felt weak from the effects of administering so much, and, on the
second day after administering to the 406, I started for the settlement
in Savoia valley. The next day after arriving in Savoia I was taken
down with a severe fever, which lasted about a week. I stopped with
the family of Brother John Hunt, who treated me very kindly. It was
about three weeks before I was able to resume my journey to the Mexican
settlements on the Rio Grande. I spent about four months preaching
to the Mexican people in New Mexico. When I arrived at Savoia on my
return, I was informed by the brethren that the minister who opposed me
at Zuni had passed there and was nearly dead with the consumption. When
I arrived at Zuni I was told by some of the most reliable Zunis that
all to whom I had administered recovered, excepting five or six that
the minister gave medicine to, and four or five that the medicine man
had tried to cure by magic. The medicine man that opposed me had died
during my absence, and the Navajo who opposed me, on returning home,
was killed by his people to keep the small-pox from spreading among
them.

This is a true statement of the manner in which the power of God was
made manifest among the Zunis, and also the judgments of God which
followed some of those who opposed it. It seemed that I was, by the
providence of God, cast among them; and I felt that I was one of the
weakest of my brethren, and to ask the Lord to strengthen me if it
was His will to make His power manifest through me. If the Lord had
not strengthened me I could not have borne up under what I passed
through at Zuni. (Brother Ammon M. Tenney, who questioned the Indians
themselves in regard to this miraculous event, says they testify as a
body to the truthfulness of the narrative.--_Ed._ )



SKETCH OF A WELL-SPENT LIFE.

BY HARRISON BURGESS.



CHAPTER I.

MY BIRTH AND CHILDHOOD--EMBRACE THE GOSPEL--A VISION--GATHER
WITH THE SAINTS AT KIRTLAND--ZION'S CAMP--MANIFESTATIONS
IN THE TEMPLE--THE SAINTS DRIVEN
FROM MISSOURI--THE PROPHET AND PATRIARCH MARTYRED--OUR
JOURNEY WESTWARD--SENT ON A MISSION.

I was born September 3, 1814, in the town of Putnam, Washington Co.,
State of New York. I lived with my parents until upwards of fourteen
years of age, and, being the eldest of my father's family, I was kept
constantly at work and had but little opportunity of acquiring an
education. My father made no profession of religion, but led a moral
and virtuous life. My childhood was not marked with any crime, although
I paid but little or no attention to religion until the seventeenth
year of my age. In July, 1832, when I first heard the fullness of
the gospel proclaimed by Elder Simeon Carter, I was convinced that
the scriptures were true and that the Book of Mormon was a divine
revelation from heaven. I was baptized and spent the following Winter
in going to school, working for my board and in meeting with the
Saints. In the Spring of 1833, I started in company with Brother John
S. Carter to the State of Vermont, where we labored about two months
and then returned to New York State.

On the third Sabbath in May while speaking to a congregation I declared
that I knew that the Book of Mormon and the work of God were true. The
next day while laboring in the field something seemed to whisper to
me, "Do you know the Book of Mormon is true?" My mind became perplexed
and darkened, and I was so tormented in spirit that I left my work
and retired into the woods. The misery and distress that I there
experienced cannot be described. The tempter all the while seemed to
say, "Do you know the Book of Mormon is true?" I remained in this
situation about two hours. Finally I resolved to know, by exercising
faith similar to that which the brother of Jared possessed, whether I
had proclaimed the truth or not, and commenced praying to the God of
heaven for a testimony of these things. Suddenly a glorious personage
clothed in white stood before me and exhibited to my view the plates
from which the Book of Mormon was taken.

In September, 1834, I started with my father's family for Kirtland,
Ohio, as it was necessary for him to stay to transact some business.
On my journey I accidentally met with the Prophet Joseph Smith, in
Springfield, Pennsylvania; I there saw him for the first time, and
heard him preach. I arrived in Kirtland and tarried there through
the Winter, during which time Brother Joseph received a revelation
calling for the strength of the Lord's house to go to Jackson Co.,
Missouri, for the redemption of Zion. I was one among the rest that
volunteered to go and fulfill this commandment. I started in March,
1834, in company with Joseph Smith and others. We had a long and
tedious journey, and arrived in Missouri on the last of June. While
the camp tarried there Brother Joseph received the word of the Lord
by revelation, relative to the camp, informing us that we were not to
fight at that time; that Zion could not be redeemed then; and that he
had required us to come thus far, as a trial of our faith; that He had
accepted of our offering, etc. Some individuals of the camp felt to
murmur at this decree, and wanted to fight the enemies of God. Brother
Joseph said the Lord would send a scourge upon us in consequence of
this unrighteous feeling. The cholera was upon us in a few hours after
this prediction, and some eighteen of our brethren fell victims to
its grasp. Among the number that I attended upon and helped to bury
was Brother John S. Carter. My feelings on this occasion can never be
described. At length I was violently seized with it myself, but through
faith in God and the kind assistance of Brother Zera H. Cole, I was
rescued from the grasp of death.

When the camp broke up I received an honorable discharge from Lyman
Wight, our commander-in-chief. After this I started for home in company
with Heber C. Kimball and several others, arriving at Kirtland, Ohio,
about the last of July. I found my friends well and the Saints were
exerting themselves to the utmost in their poverty to build the Temple
which was so far completed that I received my endowments therein in the
Spring of 1835. The Lord blessed His people abundantly in that Temple
with the Spirit of prophecy, the ministering of angels, visions, etc. I
will here relate a vision which was shown to me. It was near the close
of the endowments. I was in a meeting for instruction in the upper part
of the Temple, with about a hundred of the High Priests, Seventies
and Elders. The Saints felt to shout "Hosanna!" and the Spirit of God
rested upon me in mighty power and I beheld the room lighted up with a
peculiar light such as I had never seen before. It was soft and clear
and the room looked to me as though it had neither roof nor floor to
the building and I beheld the Prophet Joseph and Hyrum Smith and Roger
Orton enveloped in the light: Joseph exclaimed aloud, "I behold the
Savior, the Son of God." Hyrum said, "I behold the angels of heaven."
Brother Orton exclaimed, "I behold the chariots of Israel." All who
were in the room felt the power of God to that degree that many
prophesied, and the power of God was made manifest, the remembrance of
which will remain with me while I live upon the earth.

During the Winter of 1836, I attended a high school together with
Brothers Joseph and Hyrum and most of the leading men of the Church;
it was a fine opportunity for obtaining knowledge. The evenings were
mostly spent in meetings for instructions on the principles of our
faith and religion. It was then and there that the lectures in the
first part of the book of Doctrine and Covenants were given. During
this Winter and Spring the members of Zion's Camp were called together
to receive an especial blessing, according to a promise which had been
made in the before-mentioned revelation. Out of this number most of
the Twelve were selected, and also the first Seventy, of which latter
I was one. We had a meeting every Saturday to bless and ordain such as
had been called. I was blessed and ordained under the hands of Joseph
Smith, Jun., Joseph Smith, Sen., and Sidney Rigdon.

I started, on the 18th of April, on a mission to New York and Vermont,
and returned home September 20th; and again, in the Winter of '37, I
took a short mission to Ohio in company with Lucius N. Scovil. It was
while upon this mission that we heard of the persecution that had been
raised against the Church in which the printing office was burned and
that the Church were leaving for Far West, Missouri. We returned home
immediately, and I made preparations and started west with my family
on the 26th of March, in company with several other families among
whom was Brother Hyrum Smith. We had an exceedingly hard journey in
consequence of a great deal of rain and mud. We arrived at Far West the
27th of May, 1837. The next day I went to Davies county with Joseph
and Hyrum Smith and some others to look out a new location. I remained
there nine days and helped survey the site for a city. As a reward
for rendering this assistance at that time Brother Joseph selected me
a very fine city lot. I removed my family to Davies county, and in
a short time my wife was taken ill with the chills and fever, which
rendered her nearly helpless for about six months, during which time
the terrible tragedies of persecution were enacted in Missouri. My
brother-in-law, Daniel Carter, and some of his family were sick and
on my hands to provide for. Thus surrounded by affliction, I, with my
brethren, was compelled to remove my sick family to Caldwell county. We
tarried there till the next March, and were then obliged to leave the
State. In addition to removing my own family I made two or three trips
with my team to assist in removing the destitute.

I settled in Pike Co., Illinois. The people there were very kind and
humane. I preached during the year of my residence in that county about
one hundred times and baptized about thirty individuals. I removed to
Nauvoo in April, 1840, where I remained during the Summer, and in the
Fall took a mission to the east, in company with Daniel Carter. We
took our families along, and by request of Hyrum Smith moved into his
large and commodious house in Kirtland, to which was attached a most
beautiful orchard. We then proceeded farther east on our mission, as
we were authorized to visit the branches of the Church, and gather
up means for the Nauvoo Temple. I was gone about two years, when I
returned to Nauvoo.

In June, 1844, the storm of persecution arose against the leaders of
the Church, which terminated in the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum
Smith. During this scene I had the command of one of the companies of
the Nauvoo Legion, and was on duty about three weeks. I saw Joseph's
and Hyrum's dead bodies and was called upon to act as one of the guards
at the burial.

At the organization of the Seventies I was appointed one of the
presidents over the second quorum, was ordained to that office under
the hands of Elder Orson Pratt. During the Winter, Spring and Summer I
assisted in ordaining several hundred of the Seventies and organizing
them into quorums. In the Fall of 1845 the mob spirit revived and after
due reflection and counsel the Church as a body concluded to leave
the States and seek a home in the wilderness. Every possible exertion
was then made to hasten the completion of the Temple, that the Saints
might therein receive their anticipated blessings and endowments before
their departure. The Temple was finally dedicated and the giving of
endowments was commenced. It was in this house of God that my wife
Sophia was sealed to me first and afterwards Amanda M. Hammond was
given me by President B. Young.

After receiving our blessings in the Temple, myself and family made all
preparations for our wilderness journey, and crossed the Mississippi
River on the last day of May, 1846. We had a prosperous journey,
overtook the camp at Council Bluffs, crossed the Missouri River in
July, and in concert with the spirit of the camp, made preparations for
Winter Quarters.

My wife Sophia was sick most of the ensuing Winter, but through the
mercy of God her life was spared. Her disease was the scurvy of which
quite a number died. At the organization of the camp I was appointed
a captain of fifty in Brother Kimball's division, but in consequence
of sickness in my family I could not obtain the necessary outfit to
go on in the Spring company. During the year 1847 I labored very hard
to obtain the means necessary for my expected trip to the valleys of
Utah and my arrangements were nearly completed to go in the Spring of
'48, when a call came for me to go on a mission to England. I felt as
ever to respond to the call, but the idea of leaving my family, to
make their way to Utah without my company or assistance, was not very
pleasant. My family, however, chose to undertake the enterprise rather
than to have me fail to fulfill my mission. I accordingly turned my
whole attention to prepare everything in my power as comfortable and
convenient as I could for my family's expedition and resolved to see
them across the Elkhorn River myself. My team consisted of a good,
strong wagon, two yoke of first-rate oxen and a yoke of cows; I got a
boy to drive the team.

We left Winter Quarters on the 20th of May, 1848, had a good journey to
the river and crossed over it in safety. The people who were going to
perform the journey had been gathering there for some time and forming
an encampment, awaiting the arrival of the others who were to go. The
two large camps would have covered some acres. One was formed in a
square with a hollow in the center, the other in an oblong. Here the
camps were organized for traveling with captains of hundreds, fifties
and tens, with good instructions from Brother Brigham and others as to
their every-day duties. A number of the Twelve and many of the friends
and relatives of the camp had come over to visit their friends and see
them start. The business having all been accomplished, the visitors and
myself left for Nauvoo, on the morning of the third of June. While we
were waiting for the boat to take us across the river Brother Kimball
came and took me by the hand, blessed me, and prophesied many good
things on my head; said I should perform a good mission and return with
much honor to Zion. He then blessed my wives and said they should both
be blessed and prospered in my absence and that we should all live to
meet again. These predictions were fulfilled.

I was from the 3rd of June to the 27th of July getting to New York.
At St. Louis I met Joseph Clemens, who was also going to England, and
we agreed to travel together. We took the _Highland Mary_  on the Ohio
River. While on this boat we were attacked by a gang of thieves and
robbers, who intended to kill and throw us into the river, but through
the mercy of God they did not kill us, though my head was severely
injured by their blows. We could get no protection from the officers of
the boat, but had to hire a state room and shut ourselves up. The boat
was burned on her return trip.



CHAPTER II.

ARRIVAL IN ENGLAND--APPOINTED TO THE GLASGOW CONFERENCE--MY
EXPERIENCE THERE--RELEASED--START
HOME--A STORM AT SEA--CASE OF MIRACULOUS HEALING--ARRIVAL
IN THE VALLEY.

On the 21st of September I arrived in England, and was appointed by
Apostle Orson Pratt, who presided over the mission, to travel among all
the conferences of the mission with authority to transact any business
with both officers and members as the Holy Spirit might dictate. In
this way I labored about a year, in which time I was greatly blessed,
and always endeavored, by the help of the Lord, to comfort and
strengthen the Saints and to build them up in all the principles of our
holy religion.

About the 1st of July, 1849, the presidency of the Glasgow conference
was vacated and President Pratt appointed me to preside there. It was
the largest conference but one in the British Isles. After going there
I held a number of council meetings, and then traveled and preached
from one branch to another. I did not meet with much violent opposition
in my labors. There was not, as a general thing, so much cruelty
manifested towards the Elders, as there had been in some parts of
America. I will name one incident, however, which took place with me,
while I was preaching and building up the Church in my district. At one
time I gave out a notice that I would preach in a certain large town.
The people said I should not preach in that place and if I attempted
to do so, they would tar and feather me and give me a free ride out
of their town on a rail. I was apprised of the threats they had made,
and the brethren begged me not to go to fill the appointment; but I
told them I had never failed to perform my duty in this respect yet,
and I had faith that the Lord would help me through this difficulty.
I therefore went, trusting in the Lord, and preached to the people in
great plainness. They had all their preparations made, and intended to
put their threats into execution as soon as the meeting closed. When
I had finished they put out all the lights but one, which, I suppose,
they had saved for their own use. As they began to leave the house I
reached up and extinguished the other light, which left us all in the
dark, so they could not tell one from another, and I passed out in the
crowd and walked away in peace.

I was released from my mission in January, 1850. By the request of
President Pratt I left Liverpool about two weeks sooner than I had
intended, as he wished me to sail on a certain boat and take charge of
a large box containing money and goods which were to be sent to the
Presidency of the Church in Salt Lake.

Having been released to return home, I set sail from England with a
company of Saints on the 10th of January, 1850. Jeter Clinton was
appointed president of the company and I was appointed one of his
counselors.

We sailed along quite comfortably until the twenty-sixth of the month
when a terrible storm arose. About two o'clock in the afternoon the
sea began to swell and show its power, and the vessel lay first on one
side and then on the other. Water came in upon us on both sides of our
ship. We lost our sails and yard-arms, and the chains in the rigging of
the ship broke. In the evening, when everything looked most dismal, our
president called together his counselors and all joined in prayer to
the Lord to cause the winds to cease. Scarcely had the brethren ceased
their supplications when there was a calm, so sudden in fact that the
captain and the officers of the ship were greatly surprised, and they
came and inquired of us how it was that we felt so happy and gay amid
the great danger through which we had just passed. They could not
realize that the Lord removed all fear from the hearts of his faithful
Saints when they were endeavoring to do their duty.

On March 8, 1850, we arrived safely at New Orleans. We felt truly
thankful that the Lord had preserved us from the dangers of the deep
and brought us to the shores of America.

From the time of my arrival at New Orleans till the 1st of June, when I
started west, I spent my time between that city and Council Bluffs, in
preparing for my journey across the plains. I traveled with the camp in
Captain Aaron Johnson's company.

There were a few cases of cholera in the camp as we journeyed along.
I always assisted in nursing and administering to the sick. Many were
healed by the laying on of hands. One case of miraculous healing
I will mention: A Sister McGaw was taken with cholera in its most
dreadful form. I administered to her in the morning and she seemed
to be healed, but after a short time the suffering returned and was
worse, if possible, than before. She said if Brother Burgess could lay
hands on her again she would live, if not, she must die. I was at the
time a mile behind the train, assisting some of the brethren through
a bad place in the road; but the woman seemed so sure of her recovery
if I could administer to her again, that they sent a horseman after me
in all haste, who was to take charge of my team while I was gone. I
rode to the camp as fast as possible and found her in extreme agony.
She was so cramped that her head and heels nearly touched each other.
As I entered her wagon I felt the power of God resting down upon me
mightily. I laid my hands upon her head "in the name of Jesus Christ"
and by the authority of the Holy Priesthood commanded the destroyer to
leave her and the wagon instantly and trouble her no more. It did so
forthwith, but as it retreated I heard it hiss like an adder. The woman
was healed from that moment and went on her way rejoicing. Through the
mercy of God I reached the valley in safety and found my family alive
and well, as Brother Kimball had predicted when he gave me his parting
blessing on the banks of the Elkhorn River.

After returning to the valley I was called upon to perform various
duties all of which I endeavored to execute with faithfulness and
diligence. In the Fall of 1862, I moved to the southern part of Utah,
in compliance with a request of the Church authorities, to assist
in the settlement of that part of the country. I located in Pine
Valley where I erected a saw mill, and this, together with my farming
operations, provided me with the necessaries of life.

[It was here that Brother Burgess departed this life on the 10th of
February, 1883, after a long life of usefulness in which he ever sought
to faithfully perform every duty placed upon him, thereby laying up
treasures in eternity which he can henceforth enjoy.]



THE LORD'S BLESSINGS.

BY AMASA POTTER.



CHAPTER I.

CALLED TO AUSTRALIA--MY IGNORANCE--PRES. H. C. KIMBALL'S
PROPHECY CONCERNING ME--ARRIVE IN SYDNEY--ADVENTURE
WITH A DOG--GO TO CAMDEN WITH A
FELLOW-MISSIONARY--SOUGHT FOR BY A DRUNKEN MOB--GOD
BLINDS THEIR EYES AND WE ESCAPE--AT PICTON
WE PREACH IN THE COURT-HOUSE--THE WRITING ON
THE WALL--OUR SUCCESS.

In the Spring of 1856, in the days of my youth, I was called by the
First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to
go on a mission to Australia, to preach the gospel. I was young and
inexperienced, and had but very little education. I had been to school
but six months in my life, although I had been raised in the Church
from infancy, and had been taught by my mother that God had spoken from
the heavens in these last days and had sent a holy angel to reveal the
gospel that had been lost from the earth. These things I understood;
but the scriptures I never had read, from the fact that I could not
read. Under these circumstances I went to President Heber C. Kimball
and asked permission to stay at home one year, and I would go to school
and learn to read and write, and then I would go. But he said that he
had called me to a mission and he wanted me to go now. I received my
endowments, and President Kimball blessed me and prophesied many great
things which should happen to me in the next three years and a half;
for he said that I would be gone that time, and should learn to read
and write by my close application and the help of the Holy Spirit. I
bade farewell to my aged mother and started, in company with some other
Elders, for Australia.

We arrived in Carson Valley, where Judge Drummond was holding a court
at the time. President Orson Hyde was probate judge in that valley,
and had held a court a short time before we arrived. He had decided a
case of law between Col. Reese and another in the case of a mill. A.
P. Chessley, one of our missionaries, filed a demurrer against Brother
Hyde's decision, and the case was tried by Judge Drummond. Col. Reese
lost the mill. Brother Hyde told Chessley that he had better not go
on his mission, if he did, he should never see home again; for he had
sinned, with his eyes open, to get gain. Brother Hyde told us all that
if we went with that man we should share with him the displeasure of
God.

We arrived at San Francisco and there was a ship about to sail for
Australia. Half of the Elders said that they would go on that ship with
Chessley, and the remainder of us concluded to wait for another vessel.
They started, and, in about thirty days afterwards, a clipper bark was
advertised to sail and we embarked in that ship. In thirty-six days
we arrived at Sydney, Australia, having sailed about 10,000 miles and
had a pleasant voyage. The other brethren had not been heard of. One
hundred and fifteen days passed and they arrived at Melbourne. They had
almost starved to death, and had sold nearly all of their clothing to
the natives for fruit, chickens and pigs, etc., to live on. Thus was
Brother Hyde's prediction to them fulfilled.

I was now in Sydney, a large, beautiful city, containing 175,000
inhabitants. I concluded that I would travel through the city a day or
two and get something of importance to write home. I was traveling my
first day on a back street, and I saw some birds with fine plumage,
and several monkeys, performing on some wires that were stretched in
a yard near a mill. Not understanding the customs of that country, I
stepped through the gate to see the birds and monkeys. Just then a man
let loose a large dog and gave a whistle. I looked around and saw the
dog coming towards me at full speed. I sprang for the gate and got hold
of it; at the same time the dog got hold of my back, and a struggle
ensued. I finally extricated myself from the dog, but he had torn my
coat off and left me only the sleeves and the collar. I then concluded
that I had got something to write home, and I would not travel any
further in that city.

We found the opposition to the gospel very great in this place, so I
started, in company with another young Elder, to go to the interior of
the island to commence our labors preaching the gospel. When we came
to a city called Camden, forty miles from Sydney, we concluded to try
to get a place to preach in. We were refused all public houses that
we asked for. Finally we tried to get the privilege of stopping at a
public house, or tavern, all night. We told the landlord that we were
missionaries of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and
we were traveling without purse or scrip, according to the pattern
that Jesus had left on record in the Bible. The landlord asked us if
we were "Mormons." We said that we were called that name by the world.
After talking some time with him he ordered us out of the house, and
told some drunken Irishmen to run us out of the town and he would give
them a gallon of rum each. It was now after dark, and we went down one
of the streets and called at a large boot and shoe shop. The owner
said that he would keep us and we were having a good discussion on the
principles of the gospel when a rough voice called to the master of the
place, and said,

"Are you going to keep them d----d Mormons here all night?"

We looked towards the door and saw there a mob of drunken men, armed
with native war clubs, spears and the boomerang. The boomerang is a
weapon with which the natives formerly fought.

I said to my companion, "We must get out of here."

He replied, "How shall we do it without getting hurt?"

I told him that God had not sent us here to be killed in this manner,
and if we would now trust wholly in the Lord, He would deliver us.

I had no more than said these words when the owner of the house caught
the same spirit as the mob and said to us, "Get out of my house, or
I will kill you," and, at the same time, struck at my partner with a
hammer, but missed him as he sprang to one side.

The mob said, "Drive them out and we will use them up in a hurry."

I picked up my carpet-bag and umbrella and went to the door with a
prayerful heart to God that he would protect us, and I walked out
between many of them. It appeared that they did not see me or they did
not notice me. The mob was arranged on both sides of the door, with
their weapons drawn ready to strike at the first sight of us; and as
my partner came out the leader of the band called the attention of his
men to give some instructions how to deal with us, and thus he slipped
past them unseen. I took him by the arm and we started down the street.
In the darkness of the night they could not see us. About this time
the owner of the house came to the door and they asked him where the
"Mormons" were. He replied that they had gone out just that minute.
They said they knew better; "for," said they, "they have not passed us,
and you had better bring them out, or we will knock your house down."
At that they broke into the house and, not finding us, they took the
master and journeymen out and beat them almost to death.

In this deliverance we see the prediction of President Heber C. Kimball
fulfilled; for he said that I should be brought into many close places,
and it would seem that death stared me in the face; but, if I would
be faithful to my mission, the angels of God would deliver me in all
trials, and I should return in safety to the Church and to my home.
In all of my travels on that island for two years and a half, I found
that when there was a good work to be done in a city, we met with the
greatest opposition; for in this same place, where we received such
cruel treatment, we afterwards preached, and baptized, and organized a
branch of the Church with many members.

We next went to a city called Picton, and, by this time, the Lord had
made us bold to declare His gospel, for such light had burst upon our
minds as we had never thought of before; and by this time I had learned
to read and write, and had learned arithmetic very well. We applied
for the court-house and obtained it from the judge of the district. We
appointed a meeting for Friday evening, and we then put up some cards
stating the time of meeting. At the time appointed the people assembled
and filled the house. For two days my companion had been marking
passages in the Bible, and on this occasion he was intending to deliver
a fine discourse. The meeting was opened and he arose, took his text
and commenced with great importance. He had not spoken more than five
minutes when he got to the end of his sermon, for he could not say more
than "Amen." Then I was introduced to the congregation as Elder Potter,
with the remark that I would continue the subject of the gospel. I
arose with fear and trembling; for it was the first time in my life
that I had stood in a pulpit. Before me was a large Bible and prayer
book. I must say that my mind was confused; but I took a text from the
Bible that lay open before me. It was from the Prophet Amos:

 "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but He revealeth His secret unto
 His servants the prophets."

After reading it I spoke a few more words and became dumb that I could
not speak. I stood there without speaking about two minutes, when
the words of President Heber C. Kimball came to me: He said that the
time would come when I should be at a loss to know what to say to the
people, "and, at that time," he said, "if you will commence to declare
the divine mission of Joseph Smith in this our day, and the divine
authenticity of the Book of Mormon, the Lord will loosen your tongue
and you shall say the very things that are needful to be said to the
people." When this came to my mind I commenced declaring these things
to the congregation. I had spoken but a few minutes, when I thought I
saw several lines of large letters printed on the walls of the house,
and I commenced to read them and spoke about one hour. When the letters
faded from my sight I then stopped speaking. I could not tell all that
I had said; but my companion told me it was an excellent discourse.
When meeting was dismissed the judge came to us and said if we wanted
the court-house again we could have it; so we gave notice that we would
preach at that place on Sunday evening next. The next day we went
through the city and talked with many of the people, and when Sunday
evening came we lighted the chandeliers in the house, went up into the
pulpit and sat and read the scriptures. The time arrived for the people
to gather, but not a soul came. We waited half an hour, sung a hymn and
dedicated the house for meeting. We still waited; but, as no one came,
we locked up the house and went to our lodgings.



CHAPTER II.

MALIGNED BY SECTARIAN PRIESTS--INVITATION TO PREACH
AT A DISTANT TOWN--MEANS PROVIDED BY A MYSTERIOUS
PERSONAGE--BRANCH OF THE CHURCH ORGANIZED--APPLY
TO THE AUTHORITIES OF THE COLONY FOR,
AND RECEIVE, LICENSE AND PROTECTION AS MINISTERS
OF THE GOSPEL--ARRESTED--MY COMPANION'S DEFENSE--HONORABLY
RELEASED--GO TO WINDSOR--UNABLE
TO OBTAIN LODGINGS--DIRECTED BY A STRANGER--KINDLY
TREATED--AN ATTEMPT TO POISON ME--MY
COMPANION SHOT AT BY A RUFFIAN.

The morning after the meeting alluded to in the last chapter we learned
that the priests and parsons of the different denominations had met
and decided to unite in preventing their people from coming to hear us
preach, for they said that we were dangerous men, and we were of the
class of false prophets of whom Jesus spoke, who should come in the
last days to deceive the people. We had labored a few weeks in this
city and had baptized a few into the Church, when we received a letter
from Emue Plains, stating that the people would like to see and hear a
"Mormon" Elder. Emue Plains was a distance of sixty miles from where we
were, and when we started it had been raining about a week, and a great
portion of the country was flooded with water. We had a large river to
cross on the way, and we were informed that the bridge had been carried
off and there was a ferry established across the river which charged
five shillings each passenger. We did not have any money with which to
pay this charge, and my companion was anxious to know what we should do
for money to pay the ferriage with. We were then about three miles from
the ferry, and were passing through timber. I told him that we would go
into the woods and pray to God to open the heart of some one to give
it to us. We did so, and we had traveled but a short distance through
a lane between two fields, when we looked ahead of us a little way and
saw an old man coming across the field. He came into the road ahead of
us, and as he came to meet us he had a smile on his countenance. He
reached out his hand to me, as if to shake hands, and left a crown, or
five shilling piece, in my hand and went to my companion and did the
same; but spoke not a word. I cannot describe the feeling that we had
when the man took hold of our hands; we felt our hearts burn within
us, and it did not seem that we had power to ask him his name or where
he was from, as we usually did when a person gave us any article of
clothing or money. He was a man about six feet high, well proportioned,
and wore a suit of light gray clothes and a broad-brimmed hat, and his
hair and beard were about eighteen inches long and as white as snow.
We passed on and came to the ferry, and the money that we had was just
enough to pay our ferriage.

We came to Emue Plains, labored and preached one month, baptized
twenty-one persons and organized a branch of the Church. So you see
that our Heavenly Father opened up our way to preach the gospel. We
returned to Sidney and met in council with the American Elders. We
came to the conclusion that we would like to have more influence with
the people. We went before the parliament of New South Wales colony
and applied to get our names registered as ministers of the gospel, in
common with ministers of other denominations in that country. We spent
two days answering the questions of the governor and of the members
of parliament, and they decided that the doctrine that we taught was
a scriptural doctrine, and therefore we should be protected in our
rights as ministers of the gospel. They then furnished us with blank
books and forms to solemnize marriages and register births and deaths
in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Having procured
our licenses we were encouraged with the idea that we could now do
more good among the people. By this time a large amount of books had
arrived from the Liverpool office, England, and we started again for
the interior of the country, taking with us books and tracts.

Gamberriar was a mining town containing twenty thousand inhabitants.
To this place we repaired. We commenced traveling through the city,
talking to the people and selling our books and tracts; but, to begin
with, could not get any place to preach in. Early one morning, before
we started out on our labors for the day, an officer with six men came
with a writ to take us before the judge of that district, to answer
to five different complaints. We were charged with being guilty of
treason against the government, with being horse thieves, with selling
goods without a license, with preaching a blasphemous doctrine and with
trying to cause a rebellion. The court was in session; we were brought
before the judge and the trial came on. The charges were read and we
were asked, "Are you guilty, or not guilty?" We answered, "Not guilty."
The words of Jesus came to our minds:

 "But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall
 speak; for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall
 speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father
 which speaketh in you."

Our accusers were two merchants, two lawyers and one doctor. They
commenced giving in their evidence one by one, and after the judge had
heard it all he asked us if we had any defense to make, or if we wanted
a lawyer. We told him we did not want a lawyer, but we had a defense to
make; and as my companion was my senior in age, he arose to make our
defense before the court. He commenced on the treaty between England
and America. He had spoken but a few minutes when the Holy Spirit
rested upon him in such a way as I had never seen before. His face
was very white and he spoke with great power and authority. The judge
looked amazed. The house and yard were full of men who were all silent
for one hour. When he was through we presented our passports from the
city of Washington, our recommendation from the First Presidency of the
Church and our licenses from the parliament of New South Wales colony.

The judge then arose and said,

"Gentlemen, my decision in this case is that you, the accusers, who
have brought these men before this court under the pretense of grave
charges, have not proved anything against them. To the prisoners I say,
you are honorably acquitted. You are strangers to us; but I believe you
are gentlemen of honor, or our government would not have given you the
document that you bear with you. Go your way in peace, and we are bound
to protect you from the ruthless hands of degraded men. I am sorry that
we have put you to so much trouble; but go in peace."

After court adjourned I heard the people say that if we did not leave
the town we would find ourselves in a deep hole some night, so we
concluded to leave; but not before we had sold one hundred volumes of
our books. We left a testimony with them that they will never forget.

Leaving Gamberriar we traveled through the gold mine one week and sold
our books and tracts to the miners and preached to them the gospel, and
then came to a city called Windsor situated on the Penreth River. As we
had been traveling several days in the rain, and had been wet through
every day, we were desirous of getting a place to stay in the suburbs
of this city and recruit ourselves and clean up before commencing our
labors in the ministry. We tried twelve times to stay all night, but
were refused very abruptly each time. We found that a parson of the
church of England had gone before us, and had warned the people that
the "Mormon" Elders were coming, and they must shut their doors against
them. It was now nine o'clock at night, and was raining very hard. We
walked up Main street in this city, and were so wet, tired and hungry
that we could but just walk. We had traveled twenty-four miles that
day with but very little food to eat, and our boots were worn out and
our feet scalded with the water and blistered very badly. In those
circumstances my companion said to me, with tears in his eyes,

"Is it possible that the Lord has forsaken us, and will suffer us to
die in the streets of this city?"

I said to him, "Brother John Said," for that was his name, "this is a
trial of our faith, and after the bitter then comes the sweet."

While we were thus conversing, I looked ahead some distance and saw
a confectioner's shop with the door open. I said to my companion "we
will try to stay there." As we drew near to the place we saw a man come
out of the shop and walk into the middle of the street. He came down
the street towards us. He and I met first, as I was in advance of my
companion, and he said: "Good evening, friends. I have been waiting for
you some time. What has made you so late?" As I answered his questions
I drew close to him, and looked him in the face to see if I could
recognize him; but I could not.

He asked: "Where are you going to stay to-night."

I said: "We do not know."

He then put his hand into his pocket and gave me some money, and went
to my companion and did the same; and then said:

"Boys, do you see that large four-story house on the corner?"

We replied that we did.

"Well," said he, "you go there and tell the landlord that you have been
sent there to occupy the green room to-night, and he will conduct you
to it, and give you all the accommodations that he can afford."

After saying this the stranger left us, and passed on out of our sight,
in the dark. We then proceeded to the house, and found all things as
the stranger had represented. The landlord conducted us to the green
room, it was in the fourth story of the house, and while going up the
long stairs my companion said to me, "Stop;" I stopped and he said in
a low voice, "I fear that this is a plan laid to destroy us." I told
him not to fear, for we had suffered enough, and the Lord was about
to bless us. Arriving at the room we found it a beautiful place, but
we were not fit tenants for such a fine room, as our clothing was wet
through and muddy. We found everything as the stranger who met us in
the street had told us. There was dry clothing for us to put on, and
a good bed to sleep in, and the landlord sent us up a warm supper. We
then looked at the money that the man gave us in the street and found
it to be English money of the denominations ranging from a crown down
to the smallest coin in silver, and what seemed strange to us was that
both of us had the same amount and pieces just alike; the man seemed
to have a pocket nearly full of money, and it was dark when he gave
it to us. After supper we went to bed and had a good night's rest
and pleasant dreams. The next morning we got up and partook of the
hospitalities of the house and asked the landlord our bill. He answered
that "there was no charge," so we went on our way rejoicing.

We spent a few days in this city, and preached and sold our books and
had a good time with the people. I baptized one man and his family; the
man had been a Methodist preacher, and I ordained him an Elder, and
he commenced preaching the doctrines of the Latter-day Saints. While
traveling in this city I called at a public house to distribute our
books. I found two American men there, and when they heard me say I
was an American, they asked me if I was a "Mormon" preacher. I said,
"Yes, sir." "Well," said one of them, "you must have something to drink
with me as you are a fellow-countryman of mine." I told him that I did
not drink spirituous liquors of any kind, but he insisted that I must
take some wine with him. So he went into another room, as he said, to
get some wine out of the cellar. I was showing my books to several in
the room when he returned with the glasses of wine and presented one
of them to me and requested me to drink with him. I could see by the
man's countenance that he had done something wrong, so I told him that
I should not drink the wine in the glass that he offered me, but if he
would change glasses and give me the one that he was going to drink, I
would drink it if he would drink the one he offered me. He then flew
into a rage, for he knew that I had detected his design to try to
poison me. I had overheard him say, while he was gone after the wine,
that "the Mormon priests say that poison will not hurt them, but I will
soon show you that I will make one of them ache." He also said that
he was one of the party that shot Joseph Smith at Carthage jail. He
took one of my books and said that I should not have it again if I did
not drink the wine that he gave me. I stepped to the door and saw two
policemen passing and called to them. They came to my assistance, and
I told them my story. They hunted for the man, to take him, but he was
not to be found. The next day my companion went to a farm house a few
miles from the city to distribute some tracts and books and found one
of those Americans there. When he left the house this stranger followed
him with his Minnie rifle, and remarked that he had a killing contract
to kill all of the "Mormon" Elders that he could find, and when he had
said those words he drew his rifle to his face, and said "here goes for
the first one!" and fired, the bullet passing within a few inches of my
comrade's head. This vile murderer was so close to him that he did not
take close sight on his gun. When he found that he had not hit him, he
commenced loading his piece again, but by the time he had got his gun
loaded my partner was nearly a quarter of a mile distant. The ruffian
gave chase and when he came within about one hundred yards he took a
rest on a stump and fired. But the bullet whistled near by and missed
again. The assassin then gave up the chase and went back.



CHAPTER III.

A CHAT WITH A CATHOLIC--CHASED BY DOGS--AN IRISHMAN'S
DESIGN TO MURDER ME--REMARKABLE ESCAPE--ADVENTURE
WITH A WILD BULL--"HAS HE GOT YOU?"--MY
RELEASE FROM MY MISSION--INCIDENTS OF THE
HOME JOURNEY--A PROPHECY AND ITS FULFILLMENT--A
VISIT TO A SICK LADY--CONCLUSION.

My companion was called to Sidney on business, and I being left to
travel alone for a few weeks, started on a tour through the country
to sell our books. While traveling I met with an adventure at a large
tavern called the Half-way House, kept by a Roman Catholic. This house
was situated half way between Penrith and Bathurst cities. When I
called at this house the landlord was away from home, but his wife was
there and I showed her my books, some of which she purchased; and as
dinner was nearly ready I was invited to stay and get dinner. While
I was having a good discussion on the scriptures, the master of the
house came home, and brought with him a Catholic priest. The woman
showed the priest the books that she had bought, and he gave her a
severe reprimand for taking them, and then turned to me and said that
I was an infernal heretic and ought to be burned at the stake and
killed. The master of the house partook of the same murderous spirit,
and remarked that he would set his dogs on me and tear me to pieces;
while he was whipping his wife, I stepped out and started. This was
in a very heavy timbered country, and I did not follow the road, for
I knew that he would follow me, and if he found me that he would do
something desperate if he could. I had been traveling about half an
hour when I heard the sound of the large hounds and bull dogs on my
track. A thousand thoughts passed through my mind in a short time,
and I imagined that perhaps I should never see my aged mother again;
but then the thought came to me that President Heber C. Kimball had
prophesied on my head that I should live to fill my mission and return
again to the bosom of the Church. I then tried to climb up a tree, but
the bark was so smooth that I could not climb it, and by this time the
dogs had come in sight and I could hear a man's voice urging them on.
While in this situation I called on the Lord for help, and my prayer
was heard; for as the dogs came near me a large kangaroo crossed my
track in full speed, and the dogs, seeing it, turned square about and
went after the animal and did not see me at all. I then turned and went
to the road, but my troubles were not yet ended. The dogs had gone out
of hearing, but the man had discovered that the dogs were after the
animal and tried to call them back, but could not; so he came into the
road to hunt for me. I heard a rough voice calling after me, and I
looked back in the road and saw an Irishman coming on a run carrying a
large club in his hand. He swore bitterly, and said as he had caught
me now he would use me up with that club. I could see that he was
possessed of a spirit to kill, so I walked up to him and offered him
my hand, with the remark that I wanted to talk with him a short time
before he carried his threat into execution. I said, "Sir, I am an
American, and I have come here thousands of miles to do you and others
good," and then, to draw his attention, I told him that there were many
Irish people in America and some of them were very wealthy, and they
built our railroads, and made the best soldiers, and more than that,
when the famine was raging in Ireland the Americans sent several ship
loads of flour and bread stuff to them, and did not charge them one
cent for them. By this time he dropped his club and we walked along
together until we came on the hill within sight of the city Paramatta.
He stopped and we talked a short time, and he confessed to me that he
intended when he came up to me, to have killed me with the club, but he
was glad now that he did not strike me with it. He shook hands with me
and started back home. Little did he think that it was an overruling
Providence that stayed his hand that he was not permitted to strike
with the club. Here I joined my companion again and we started on a
tour through the country.

The island of Australia abounds in many parts with wild cattle. As we
were traveling one day through the woods on an old road not much used,
all at once we heard a thundering sound behind us, and my partner who
was about one rod behind me cried, "Look out for wild cattle!" There
was some fallen timber near by, and I ran, got up on a tree top and
then looked back to see where my companion was. I saw that he was in
danger and I ran to his assistance, but before I could reach him a
wild bull had caught him and thrown him on his horns; but he had no
sooner struck the ground than he sprang to his feet again. The bull
came the second time and my companion caught him by the horns, and was
thrown again, this time alighting in a tree top, where the animal did
not attempt to follow him, but turned around at me as I was belaboring
him with a club. When I saw that he had turned on me, I felt my first
fear of being hurt. There was a tree about three rods distant from
me, I thought if I could get to it I could save myself by dodging the
bull, so I started to run to the tree, the bull close after me with his
head down, ready to hook on the first touch of his horns. Quite faint
I succeeded in reaching the tree and whirled myself around it. The
bull threw up his head and snorted and passed on. About this time my
companion rose up out of the tree-top, where the bull had thrown him,
and called to me, "Has he got you?" I answered, "No, sir, it takes a
smarter bull than that to catch me on a fair race." I then went to see
if my partner was hurt, and found that all the bruise or hurt that he
had received was in the palms of his hands, caused by taking hold of
the bull's horns to save himself.

On the 15th day of July, 1858, we received a letter from President
Brigham Young, stating that we were all of us released from our mission
and called home to help protect the homes of the Saints. We therefore
settled our business in Sidney, made a short visit to the country
branches of the Church, appointed local Elders as presidents over them,
bade them all farewell and returned again to Sidney. In a few days
we all went on board a fine ship. The names of the American Elders
besides myself that were returning were, A. J. Stewart, G. S. Clark,
S. R. Chappin and J. H. Said. The night before the ship was to start
nearly all the sailors took a boat and deserted, leaving the captain
with only four seamen on board. When morning came the captain went on
shore and succeeded in capturing and bringing back in irons three of
the runaways. He then went among the passengers to see if he could hire
hands to man the ship. I agreed to work for him as steward and had the
direction of all the store of provision on board. This proved to be a
great blessing to the Saints who were with us, as many of them were
sick on the trip and I could administer to their wants.

Previous to starting the captain loaded the ship with eleven hundred
tons of New Castle coal, and this great weight caused the ship to draw
twenty-four feet of water. As our captain was not much acquainted with
the South Pacific seas, he concluded to sail south of the Society
Islands.

The first ten days of our voyage passed in peace and safety. Nothing
happened to us or our good ship only that some of us were very
sea-sick, but that soon left us. We had now traveled fifteen hundred
miles and were passing the coast of New Zealand when a terrific storm
came upon us from the north. During the whole night we drifted towards
the land and next morning we could plainly see it. The wind was blowing
a gale and the captain ordered the ship to be tacked many times, but
it seemed that every tack brought us nearer the shore. The water could
be seen flying upon the rocks a distance of many feet. The anchor was
lowered, but it was useless as the ground could not be reached. The
next order was to throw overboard the loading. All hands therefore went
to work and we had soon emptied a hundred tons of our cargo into the
sea. This made the ship ride the waves more safely.

About this time the first mate asked us if we would not pray to God
that the winds might be stayed or changed to another course. We told
him that we had done our praying before starting from shore and now
in times of peril we should watch and work. We did, however, ask our
Father in heaven to change the winds and they immediately changed from
the north to the south and just in time to save our good ship from
striking that terrible rock called the King's Head, which towers four
thousand feet above the sea. By evening we were out of sight of land
and sailing along nicely towards our destination.

I shall never forget the day when we struck the trade-winds. On that
day the captain ordered me to get all on board a fresh chicken dinner,
the first cabin at eleven, the second at twelve and the steerage at one
o'clock. I worked accordingly and while carrying a large china platter
full of fresh chickens on my head the man at the wheel let the ship
swing into the track of the waves and a large wave struck the ship on
the broad side, broke in about eight feet of the bulwarks and covered
the deck with about two feet of water. I was thrown to the deck;
platter was smashed and the chickens were taken into the sea; but worse
than all, I was dashed from side to side and almost drowned; I came
near being washed overboard into the sea, the galley was filled with
water and the fire was extinguished, so we did not get any fresh dinner
that day.

After arriving in San Francisco, the captain went on shore and was
offered an advanced price for his load; he asked our counsel and we
told him to retain his load for one week; he did so and then sold for
six thousand dollars more than he had been previously offered. He made
us a nice present in cash which helped us on our way home.

Brother Chappin was impressed to tell the captain that his ship never
would cross the ocean again, but would sink to the bottom of the sea
and that he should barely escape with his life. One month later the
captain freighted his ship with a valuable cargo bound for Melbourne,
Australia, but in passing out of the heads at San Francisco without
a tug-boat his ship was driven on the sands and in three hours after
was a total wreck. Had it not been that a steamer was passing out of
the bay at the time and went to the rescue all on board would have
been lost, but as it was they were saved. The captain was the owner of
the ship and as it was not insured he lost all his fortune in a few
dreadful hours; he returned home to Boston, Mass., a poor man. Thus the
prophecy of one of the servants of God to him was fulfilled.

Five of us Elders went to Sacramento and then went to other places to
get employment in order to procure means for our journey home. I worked
a short time at cutting wood, and while at that business I had the
following dream: A messenger came to me and said, "You may cease this
labor and work in the ministry. You are wanted at one Mr. Green's now."
I had been to that man's place and had preached to him and his family.
The daughter believed and wanted to be baptized, but could not be at
that time.

The next morning while I was settling with the man for whom I had
worked, a messenger came on horse-back with the news that this young
Miss Green was not expected to live an hour. She had a putrid sore
throat and had been asking for me all night. I had a few miles to go
before reaching the house and on my way I purchased a bottle of sweet
oil and went on a hill in the woods and there consecrated it for the
anointing of the sick. About eleven o'clock I arrived at the house and
found it full of strangers, most of whom were Irish Catholics. When it
was announced that I had come the young lady aroused from her stupor
which all pronounced as death. She reached out her hand to me and in
a whisper said, "Thank God I have seen you before I die." She tried
to speak further, but could not. I then told all in the house to sit
down. They did so, and I then knelt by the side of the bed and asked
the Lord to spare her a short time. I then anointed her with oil to her
burial. At this she sat up in bed and said, "Give me some water." After
drinking a little water she conversed on the gospel for half an hour,
to the amazement of all in the house. She said she had hoped to live
to gather with the Saints, but now she was going home to her God. I
had taught these people the principle of baptism for the dead, and her
last words were, "Remember me in the day that you are baptized for the
dead;" thus saying she sank down again and her noble spirit fled to the
paradise of God.

The next day I filled my valise with books and started for the mines,
stopping frequently by the way to talk to the people. I experienced
much opposition from the people and was about to return without doing
much good when I was impressed to go in another direction. I came to a
small settlement where I traveled a few days and sold some books. One
family by the name of Millgate made me welcome at their house. I stayed
there one week and the last night I stayed with them I took the family
at midnight and baptized them in a reservoir near at hand. The time
had now arrived for us to start home, and having purchased a spring
wagon and a pair of horses three of us started for home. Three and a
half years had now past since I received my blessing under the hands of
President H. C. Kimball and all that had been predicted was fulfilled
when I arrived home in safety.



RESULTS OF DISOBEDIENCE.

BY T. E. DANIELS.

HOW OUR MISSIONARIES ARE SUSPECTED--CHILDREN LOST--SUPPOSED
CASE OF KIDNAPPING--MYSELF AND COMPANION
ARE ACCUSED--THE DEAD BODIES ARE FOUND--DISOBEDIENCE
BRINGS ITS OWN REWARD.

In the winter of 1869-70, while I was on a mission to the Eastern
States, the incidents which I am about to relate occurred. They will
serve to show the strong prejudice and superstitious dread with which
many people regard the Latter-day Saints, or, as they are commonly
called, "Mormons."

In company with Brother Fairbanks, with whom I was traveling, I visited
some of his relatives and stayed a while in the State of New Jersey.
From here we took a trip into the northern part of New York State,
where we remained some time, and then returned to New Jersey. During
our absence the following incident occurred:

Near what is called Pompton Plains, New Jersey, a family, consisting
of parents and three children, lived near the edge of a patch of
timber land. One evening in the latter part of December, the two elder
children, aged respectively nine and five years, went to a hickory
tree about half a mile from the house to gather nuts, contrary to the
bidding of their mother, who had charged them strictly not to go.
Before the mother had time to go after them, night came on, and, to
make matters worse, it commenced raining. She called loudly for them,
but no answer was received from the little truants. The night grew
pitchy dark and the mother's anxiety increased. What was she to do?
Her husband not yet returned from his work, no houses near or help at
hand and she alone with her young babe, not daring to leave it to go
and search the missing ones. As she waited and looked in vain for their
return her anxiety became almost unbearable and she started out with
her child in her arms, but the rain drove her back. Soon afterwards
her husband returned, and the hurried story of his children's absence
needed no repeating to rouse him to action. He started immediately
in search of them. He went to the hickory tree, but no children were
there. He called aloud, but was answered only by the wind whistling
through the trees. After satisfying himself that they were not in that
vicinity he returned home, fondly hoping that the little ones had, by
this time, reached there. But in this he was disappointed. The wind had
now set in pretty strongly and the air was keen with frost.

What to do now was the question, for it was certain the children were
lost, and, being thinly clad, if they were not soon found they must
certainly perish. The father ran to the nearest neighbors, a distance
of half a mile, and gave the alarm. As soon as possible a company of
fifteen or twenty men and boys were collected to assist in the search.
But, by this time, it was nearly midnight, and no tidings had been
heard of the little wanderers.

Their arrangements for searching were hurriedly made. They divided into
squads and went in different directions, calling loudly as they went
and searching every place where they could imagine the children would
have strayed, and thus the search was continued all night till the men
were almost tired out and frozen. Morning dawned upon that desolate
cottage--a cold and cheerless morning to its inmates, for no relief
had yet come to the anxious parents. Another call was made upon the
people to continue looking for them, and they turned out and scoured
the country, but in vain, for not a sign of the missing children could
be found. Thus the second night passed. As the news of the loss spread
through the district additional interest and anxiety were awakened,
and the sympathetic neighbors turned out in force to aid the bereaved
parents in seeking the lost ones. As the time passed the hope of
finding them alive died out, but the efforts did not cease. About four
miles from the house there were large iron works that employed about
three hundred men, and on the third day these workmen turned out
_en masse_ and increased, by their number, the force
engaged in the search. They organized and examined, as they
thought, every foot of land in the vicinity, but with the same
discouraging result.

A number of Spiritualists resided in the neighborhood, also some
"fortune-tellers;" and they were applied to to divine, if possible,
where the children were. They pretended to do so, but their stories
conflicted fearfully and all conjectures failed. It was finally
suggested that they had been kidnapped. A couple of "Mormon" Elders, it
was said, had been in that vicinity and they were suspected of having
spirited them away and sent them to Salt Lake. This was only one among
a great many reports circulated against the Latter-day Saints, all of
which gained ready credence. A reward of three hundred dollars was
offered for the recovery of the children; and a great many, stimulated
by a desire to gain the reward, spent days in searching them.

Thus matters went on for about three weeks, towards the last the search
being prosecuted at intervals only; when one Sunday two or three
neighbors decided upon going over the ground once more, with a faint
hope of finding them. About three quarters of a mile from the house
they noticed a number of crows flying around in the air and hopping
upon the tree tops, a short distance from them. Though they paid little
attention to the crows at first, when they approached nearer to them
they noticed, by the peculiar actions of the birds, that there was some
unusual attraction for them in the vicinity. Near by was a high ledge
of rocks, under which they saw some of the crows fly. They made their
way under this ledge to where the crows seemed to be busy, when, to
their horror, they discovered the remains of the missing little ones,
but so disfigured as hardly to be recognizable. They had wandered
there to find shelter, and there perished. The elder of the two had
manifested a noble disposition in the hour of their extremity, for it
appeared that he had taken off his little coat and tenderly covered
it over his little sister to protect her from the cold. Much of their
flesh had been eaten off by the crows when found, but their remains
were carefully taken to their sorrowful, heart-broken parents.

The next day there was a funeral at the Methodist church, near by,
attended by the old and young of the entire neighborhood, assembled to
see conveyed to their last resting-place the bodies of the children
whose loss they all felt so keenly. No language can describe the
feelings of those bereaved parents. Their sorrow was too deep for words
to express.

We visited the place a short time afterwards, saw the cliff under which
the children died, and learned how the final recovery of their bodies
had relieved us of the imputation of having kidnapped them.

There is a lesson which every child may learn from this sad narrative:
the necessity of obedience to parents. In obedience only is their
safety. Though those grief-stricken parents forgave, in their hearts,
the little act of disobedience which robbed them of their loved ones,
it was none the less true that had they been obedient, as they ought,
to their mother, they would not thus have met their fate.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Labors in the Vineyard, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LABORS IN THE VINEYARD ***

***** This file should be named 49327.txt or 49327.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/9/3/2/49327/

Produced by Shawnee Hawkes, Mormon Texts Project Intern
(http://mormontextsproject.org/)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
