The Project Gutenberg EBook of Observations on the Causes, Symptoms, and
Nature of Scrofula or King's Evil, Scurvy, and Cancer, by John Kent

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Observations on the Causes, Symptoms, and Nature of Scrofula or King's Evil, Scurvy, and Cancer
       With Cases Illustrative of a Peculiar Mode of Treatment

Author: John Kent

Release Date: November 13, 2007 [EBook #23468]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCROFULA OR KING'S EVIL ***




Produced by Bryan Ness, David T. Jones and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)









OBSERVATIONS

ON THE

CAUSES, SYMPTOMS, AND NATURE

OF

SCROFULA OR KING'S EVIL,

SCURVY, AND CANCER;

WITH

CASES ILLUSTRATIVE OF A PECULIAR MODE OF
TREATMENT.

[Illustration: "All Plants, from the Hyssop on the wall to the Cedar
of Lebanon, have some essential parts."]

BY J. KENT,
_Stanton, Suffolk_.


_Eighth Edition._


BURY ST. EDMUND'S:
PRINTED BY W. B. FROST, 34, CHURCHGATE STREET.

MDCCCXXXIII.




PREFACE.


In consequence of the extreme prevalence of Scrofulous, Scorbutic, and
Cancerous Diseases, and the ignorance which exists on the part of the
public, as to their causes, symptoms, and nature, I have been induced
to reprint my observations on those subjects, and to send forth an
Eighth Edition for the information of the afflicted.

To these remarks, I have appended a relation of several cases, which
have been cured by a peculiar mode of treatment which I have been in
the habit of employing for twenty-six years; during which long period I
have seen and treated an immense number of cases of the above
description.

These cases I have rendered very concise, preferring the main points
in each to a verbose and tiresome description of the minutiae; and
although the number might have been extended to many hundreds, I trust
a sufficiency have been detailed to establish the success of my
practice, and to show the afflicted the nature and modes of attack of
the diseases above mentioned.

I have confined myself to a simple relation of the facts of each case,
and on those facts such case must stand or fall. I have not resorted
to those _artificial props_ which some men are in the habit of
employing because the cases themselves are too lame to stand alone; I
allude to the practice of soliciting the attestations of the patients,
and decoying the simple, the ignorant, well-intentioned, but deceived
neighbours, to add their signatures to cases of which they know
nothing, and of which the details are a series of bombast, falsehood,
ignorance, and humbug. There are many of the cases which I have
related to which I could have obtained the signatures of clergymen,
Members of Parliament, magistrates, and other persons high in rank and
station in life, without saying a word about overseers, churchwardens,
and parishioners, the signatures of whom might be obtained at all
times; but, established as my practice is, I would scorn to importune
those gentlemen, and impertinently to place their names before the
public in a position which every sensible man must declare to be that
of extreme negligence, ignorance, or unbecoming officiousness.

It may be readily supposed, that from the long career of success which
I have had in the treatment of scrofulous diseases, some impudent
individuals should have attempted to imitate my mode of proceeding,
and to foist themselves and their spurious _remedies_ upon the public;
of this I should have cared nothing had they not done it at my
expense; because these inventions will find their proper level in the
estimation of the public, notwithstanding their props and delusions.
But these men are absolutely so ignorant, that they are compelled to
copy my cases and observations _verbatim_; and I have little doubt
that this edition will have issued from the press but a very few
months, before one or other of them will be purloining such parts of
it as their hired scribes may consider to answer their purpose. Not
that these imposters _understand_ the observations which I have made
on scrofula or cancer, their heads are too empty--their ignorance too
profound--and their pretensions consequently too barefaced. Relying
upon the credulity of the public, they make no scruple in being guilty
of glaring plagiarism; they thus strut about in borrowed plumes, and
their presumption keeps pace with their want of information.

As a proof of the grossest ignorance, I have seen it asserted that
sixty cases of _confirmed_ (or constitutional) cancer in the mouth or
throat, have been treated with complete success; while, in reality,
the cases, _if they ever existed_, (of which I have considerable
doubt) were either of a scrofulous nature, or the remains of a certain
disease. I am confident the pretender NEVER saw a _real case_ of
cancer of the mouth and throat; and the very assertion that portions
of bone have been exfoliated in these cases, gives the lie direct to
the whole, for it is a fact that cancer never causes bone to
_exfoliate_, and in this I am borne out by every medical authority. It
may cause the long bones to become fragile, so that the patient may
have a fractured limb from a very slight cause, or it may convert bone
into a dense carcinomatous structure; but _exfoliation will never take
place_. Then as to the occurrence of _confirmed_ cancer in the mouth
and throat, I have no hesitation in stating that it _rarely if ever
occurs_, and that if it ever did, it was a perfectly incurable
disease; and I could cite a host of authorities to prove my assertion.
And who is to oppose these great authorities? What man with experience
so extensive--with knowledge so profound--with sagacity so
searching--with learning so deep--shall declare that he himself has
seen and treated sixty cases of _true carcinomatous disease_ of the
mouth and throat? Who is this Goliah of Surgery? Who is the judge in
this matter to whose opinion he commands us to bow? Reader! the fact
is, that the assertion is so glaringly false, that if only a particle
of shame enter into his composition, it must betray its existence.

This, however, is only one part of the fabricated statements which
have been delusively put forth to deceive and misguide the public; but
I presume it would be a waste of time to attempt to prove the
abominable practices of these empirics; not that it would be a
difficult matter to do so, for were I so disposed I could adduce such
a body of evidence as would demolish their empty pretensions with as
much ease as the sun dispels the morning vapours. But I think my
readers will agree with me that I have displayed enough of their
charlatanry to satisfy any man who lays claim to anything like common
sense.

Leaving, then, these literary delinquents to their HONEST
_reflections_, I have merely to observe, that the medicines and
applications which I am in the habit of using, are principally
selected from indigenous plants; and I cannot but regret that the
medical botany of our own country should have been so much neglected;
and I am not singular in this opinion, as many eminent medical men
have expressed themselves to the same effect; and, indeed, many of the
plants which I use are now frequently resorted to by the faculty. I
claim _no specific_ in the treatment of those diseases which come
under my cognizance; I merely state that my mode of managing those
cases has been extremely successful, and refer the reader to the
following cases as a proof of my assertion.

It will be seen that many of these cases have been of long standing.
This has been done for the purpose of showing that the medicines and
treatment generally exert a permanent effect on the constitution of
the patient, thus allaying the scruples of many persons, that although
they may be successful for a certain period, they may not prevent a
relapse. This may be perfectly true in some cases; all the patients in
these cases were perfectly well when this pamphlet went to press; yet
I will not positively assert that they shall always continue so. This
assurance would be foolish and indiscreet, because there is scarcely
one disease to which the human frame is subject, which may not, on
some peculiar exciting cause being applied, be again brought into
action, although the person may have been perfectly relieved from the
first attack. Instances of this description frequently occur in
secondary attacks of measles, small-pox, scarlet fever, &c.; and
surely it may occur in a disease like scrofula, the nature and
treatment of which has "_perplexed the researches and baffled the
efforts of the most eminent writers and practitioners of Europe_." At
any rate, when we see cases of twenty years' standing, and upwards,
there is but little room for suspicion of a relapse.

In conclusion, I have to beg that the reader will attentively peruse
the observations on Scrofula and Cancer; as I consider it highly
important that every individual should be fully acquainted with the
symptoms of these, too often, intractable diseases, and that their
approaches should be crushed at the onset. As to the cases, the reader
is at full liberty to make every inquiry; and being based upon the
foundation of truth, I have no apprehension as to the result proving
perfectly satisfactory, whether such inquiry be directed by an honest
impulse, or by feelings of a more questionable description.

JOHN KENT
_Stanton, Aug. 10, 1833._




ON
STRUMA, SCROFULA, OR KING'S EVIL.

Scrofula, at every time of life, is the most formidable enemy of the
human race, and, under various shapes, it occasions more deaths than
all other chronic diseases whatever.--M. POILROUX.


This disease is extremely prevalent in this country; so much so that
scarcely any family can claim an exemption from its attacks. It is
technically called _Struma_, or _Scrofula_, which are synonymous
terms; but in common language it is called the King's Evil. The latter
appellation is derived from the circumstance of Edward the Confessor,
touching persons afflicted with it; and it is said they were
miraculously cured thereby. This practice was continued down to the
reign of Charles the Second, who touched 92,000 persons afflicted with
the disease; and it appears that Queen Anne was the last Sovereign who
practised such a ridiculous and superstitious imposition. Having thus
disposed of the origin of the name of the disease, I may observe that
it is more particularly prevalent in those countries where there are
great vicissitudes of weather; hence it prevails in Scotland, and the
northern parts of Germany and France, as well as in Great Britain; in
fact, a cold atmosphere, in almost any country, powerfully predisposes
to, or excites an attack of scrofula. It is on this well-known
principle that we are enabled to explain the frequent occurrence of
the disease in this country during the changeable state of the Spring
and Autumn seasons; for it is perfectly true, that it frequently makes
its first appearance at one or other of those periods; or where it may
be already in existence it becomes excessively aggravated. This
disease cannot be propagated by contact or contagion; it exists in
individuals in whom there is a peculiarity of constitution which
predisposes them to its attacks; and this brings me to the
consideration of one of the most important causes of the disease,
namely, _an hereditary taint_. It is a well ascertained fact that 99
cases out of 100 arise from this cause, and the result of my practice
corroborates it. It is, however, very remarkable that it may appear in
one generation, pass over the second, and appear again in the third.
The other causes of this disease are bad and unwholesome diet,
insufficient clothing, neglect of exercise, and want of proper
cleanliness. I may also observe, that it frequently makes its first
appearance after an attack of measles, small-pox, rheumatic fever, or
other debilitating affections; and it is often excited into obvious
existence by blows, sprains, bruises, or other accidents.

This disease may attack any part of the human body; but in general
commences in the _glandular_ structures, such as the glands in the
arm-pits, in the neck, &c.; it often also attacks the joints, as the
knee, the elbow, the hip, the wrist, the ankle, and likewise the
fingers and toes. Too often it does not confine its ravages to the
external parts, but it attacks the vital parts; when it affects the
lungs it is called consumption, and I wish this to be particularly
understood, that _consumption is neither more nor less than scrofula
of the lungs_. When it attacks the glands of the mesentery, the belly
becomes large and hard, while the legs and arms waste; the patient is
voracious, yet his food fails in affording sufficient nourishment, and
he gradually loses his strength and dies. Then the liver, the heart,
the spleen, and even the brain itself, may become the seats of this
dreadful disease. Lastly, we may mention that the bones are very
commonly affected, and even destroyed, from the attacks and long
continuance of the disease. Hence it will be seen, that both internal
and external parts of the human body are equally liable to the ravages
of scrofula; and it is proper to remark, that it often commences
externally, and after an uncertain time, it leaves the surface and
attacks the internal parts, in which case it almost invariably
terminates fatally. Many times have I seen the disease commence in the
joints, or in the glandular parts, and go on for a considerable length
of time; it has then left these parts, and the unhappy patient has
been carried off by consumption, or scrofula of the lungs. In the same
manner have I often remarked, that after limbs have been amputated for
scrofula, the operation has evidently hastened the death of the
patient, by the disease immediately attacking the more important
parts. It is for this reason that I have a decided objection to all
operations for scrofula, because the experience which I have had in
scrofula for the last 26 years, has proved to me that such operations
are worse than useless; I consider them as positively dangerous,
inasmuch as they hasten an event which in all probability might have
been prevented.--Scrofula is not a _local_ disease which may be
remedied by the knife or any other local remedy; but it is a
_constitutional_ disease, which must be treated by constitutional
means.

Now scrofula is so insidious in its approach, and so distressing, and
often fatal, in its consequences, that the form of its commencement
ought to be known to all individuals who are liable to its attacks,
either from an hereditary tendency, or other causes. When it commences
in the glands about the neck, behind the ears, in the arm-pits, hams,
&c., it appears as hard and indolent swellings, somewhat moveable
under the skin, the colour of which is little changed; these tumours
or swellings gradually increase in number and size till they form one
large hard tumour, which often continues for a long time without
breaking, and when it does break it only discharges a thin _sanies_ or
watery humour from one or more small apertures. The disease even then
maintains its indolent character; the ulcerated parts become languid
and inactive, and the constitution begins to be affected; the patient
complains of weakness--there is a want of appetite; there are
frequently profuse night sweats, and feeling of languor and lassitude.

When from blows, bruises, sprains, or other causes, the joints of the
elbows, wrists, ankles, knees, fingers or toes, become affected, the
disease proceeds in the same slow manner, frequently destroying the
ligaments or tendons; the matter insinuating itself between the bones
till they become carious, and ultimately destroyed. What is commonly
termed _white swelling_ is of this description; it may continue for a
great length of time, and yet the patient may recover, excepting a
stiffness or contraction of the affected joint. I may also remark that
in Scrofulous constitutions there is frequently a thickness of the
upper lip, or swelling of the lower part of the nose; the eyes are
also peculiarly liable to attacks of scrofula, in which case the light
is remarkably offensive to those organs. The skin and muscles are
loose and flabby; and the mental powers of children so affected are
often prematurely displayed.

Having thus described the nature and symptoms of scrofula, I shall now
proceed to make some observations on the treatment of that disease.

The cure of scrofula is generally so difficult that it has become an
_opprobrium_ of surgery. There is not _one_ specific remedy for it;
even the medicines and applications which I am in the habit of
employing, will not be equally efficacious in persons of different
constitutions, nor in the same person at all times; and as such, some
little alteration frequently becomes necessary to adapt the remedies
to the present state of the disease. It is from this difficulty of
cure that so many remedies have been proposed in scrofula; and yet the
same difficulty continues, plainly shewing that the greater part of
these _nostra_ are mere deceptions, imposing upon the sufferer, both
in mind and pocket. Hence the proposers of these fictitious remedies
become more bold and impudent than ever; nothing is too barefaced for
them to publish; not even that they can extract carious bone without
any other aid than "_the power of their medicines_,"--than which
nothing can be more impudently false. These deceptions, however, find
their proper level, and they then rapidly sink into oblivion. The
botanical medicines and applications which I have had the honour to
bring before the public as remedies for scrofula have stood the test
of _twenty-six years_' experience; during which period many hundreds
of cures have been effected solely by their agency. They still
maintain their unrivalled efficacy; scrofula has yielded its
stubbornness and its malignity to their powers in a vast variety of
instances, and they may be fairly considered as established in the
opinion of the public. Yet, notwithstanding this success, I do not
publish them as specifics; I am not vain enough to challenge the
world, like a mountebank; I am aware that they do, in some
constitutions, sometimes fail of effecting a cure; yet the great
majority of instances in which they have succeeded after every other
means had been tried, fully entitle them to superior consideration;
more especially, as in those cases where they may have failed of
complete success, they have evidently been of essential service in
retarding the progress and alleviating the pain of the disease. I
would also remark that they exert a permanent effect on the
constitution; the patient is not cured to-day and his case published
to-morrow; but most of the cures which I have published have been of
from _two to twenty years_' standing.

I would now particularly direct the attention of patients to the
nature, causes, and symptoms of scrofula, as detailed above, the more
especially as I have patients daily coming to me who do not know what
disease they are really labouring under, and express their
astonishment on being told its real nature. By attending to the
symptoms they might then attack the disease before it becomes fully
developed, when it "often produces the most miserable objects of human
wretchedness;" and when it frequently becomes impossible to say, "Thus
far shalt thou go, and no further."




CANCER,

ITS NATURE AND SYMPTOMS.


Cancer is, unfortunately, one of those desperate diseases to which the
human frame is liable, and more to be dreaded than any other, inasmuch
as it is insidious in its approach, and destructive to the greatest
degree when it is perfectly developed. It is so intractable and
malignant in its nature that it is generally considered an incurable
disease; and not without reason, as notwithstanding the great increase
of knowledge amongst that valuable portion of the community, the
medical profession, yet it baffles all their efforts to subdue it, and
sets at defiance all the triumphs of science. This disease rarely
occurs in young subjects. An eminent surgeon states, that in the
course of nearly forty years' extensive practice, he has seen but two
instances of its occurring under 30 years of age; most usually it
commences at the age of between forty and fifty years. Like many other
diseases it is frequently hereditary, many members of the same family
having become the subjects of cancer. It most usually attacks the
female breast, the lips, particularly the lower one, the tongue, the
skin, and the glandular parts about the neck and arm-pits; the
stomach, the liver, the lungs, and the brain, may also become affected
with this terrible malady. Sometimes it commences without any
ostensible cause, and the attention of the patient is frequently
directed to the case by mere accident; at other times, blows, bruises,
or continued pressure upon a part, may often be traced as the exciting
cause. In either case, however, it is generally found in the state of
a hard lump or knot, varying in its size, it is loose and moveable,
without pain or discolouration of the skin. It may continue in this
state for many months, or even years; it then enlarges, the surface of
the tumour becomes more or less knotty or uneven; it becomes hot and
painful, and the pain is of a peculiar darting, piercing nature, or
what the faculty technically call _lancinating_; and the patient's
health, which had hitherto continued tolerably well, now begins to
suffer from the irritation of the disease. In process of time the part
ulcerates, a discharge of fetid ichorous matter issues from it;
sometimes it bleeds freely, and there is a burning pain in the part.
The ulcer becomes of considerable size, and assumes a frightful
aspect. The patient becomes dejected in his spirits, his countenance
is sallow and woe worn, his appetite fails, his days and nights are
full of sorrow and pain, the disease still progresses, till, finally,
death comes to the aid of the unhappy sufferer, and closes the scene
of anguish and misery.

Such is the progress of this appalling malady. It commences apparently
in a trifling way, it terminates in destruction of life.

I have said that the patients' spirits are usually dejected in this
disease, and I wish this to be particularly noticed, as it points out
how cautious a medical man ought to be in stating positively to the
sufferer the real nature of his complaint. The mind is so depressed by
the disease, that the simple communication of the fact to the patient
often produces such a shock to the feelings as he rarely recovers
from; indeed, it often accelerates the death of the patient, and such
being the case, I am quite certain that no man of experience,
judgment, or common sense, would ever commit himself so seriously.
Whenever it is done, it is usually committed by some daring
unprincipled empiric, who often finds it to his interest to pronounce
a case cancerous when in 99 cases out of 100 it is really not so. Now,
with respect to the cure of cancer, I can confidently assert, that
when the disease is really cancer, when it occurs as a constitutional
disease, (as it almost always does) and when it is perfectly
developed, no known remedy is in existence which has the power of
destroying it. It sets even the knife at defiance, for I have
repeatedly seen that when the disease has been scientifically
extirpated, it either returns to the same part, or to the
neighbourhood of the same part, and in such cases the disease has
generally proceeded in its second attack with extraordinary rapidity.
I am strengthened in this assertion by the observations of Professor
Monro--he says, "_Of nearly sixty cancers which I have been present at
the extirpation of, only four patients remained free of the disease
for two years. Three of these lucky people had occult cancers in the
breast, and the fourth had an ulcerated cancer of the lip. The disease
does not always return to the part where the former tumour was taken
away, but more frequently in the neighbourhood, and sometimes at a
considerable distance. Upon a relapse, the disease in those I saw was
more violent, and made a much quicker progress than it did in others
on whom no operation had been performed_."--I believe the whole
medical profession are of the same opinion; in fact, those gentlemen
are candid enough to acknowledge that cancer is a disease over which
their art has no control. This is much to be deplored, inasmuch as it
has enabled the most unprincipled characters to practise their
impositions upon the unhappy sufferers with the greatest impunity.
What but the most consummate impudence can allow a man to assert that
he has cured a genuine cancer, when that very man does not know the
nature of cancer, or point out what is, or what is not, a malignant
disease?

Having thus described the nature and symptoms of cancer; and having
adverted to the effect of medicine upon this disease, I shall make
some remarks on the treatment of the same. I have stated there is no
specific remedy known for this disease; and that those who pretend to
such specific are IMPOSTERS of the most dangerous description; such
men will boast of "_great discoveries_;" they will sound their own
trumpet and tell you that they are men of "_great skill_;" they will
flourish a "_challenge to the world_;" and, in fact resort to every
means to entrap the unhappy sufferer, which great impudence, unbounded
ignorance, and glaring falsehoods, will enable them to do. I may also
allude to the indiscretion of those who are induced, by repeated
solicitations from such imposters, to allow their names to be appended
to cases which are false in fact, and only calculated to promote the
sordid motives of such characters. The attestators are thus led to
countenance an infamous species of deception; and are equally
responsible to the community for any injury which such men may
inflict. Hence they ought to be extremely careful in allowing this use
to be made of their names, as I cannot believe it to be their wish to
countenance such practices intentionally. I have thus exposed the
fallacy of such a specific for cancer, and in these remarks I am sure
I shall be supported by the whole medical profession.

I may now observe, that with regard to the treatment which I have
adopted in cancers for the last 26 years, I am ready to confess, that
it has often proved ineffectual as to a cure. During that period I
have seen an immense number of cancerous cases, and I candidly avow
that they have frequently disappointed my wishes, and the hopes of the
patients; I, therefore, do not publish to the world a specific,
because in that case I know I should be stating that which is
notoriously untrue; I should be guilty of a great moral sin, blasting
the hopes of those who might entrust themselves to my care, and
hurrying them to their graves, full of anger, grief, and
disappointment. All I can say is, that my mode of treatment is simple,
and that if it do not produce a cure it will at least mitigate the
sufferings of the patient. Many have left me in consequence of not
getting well, they have resorted to other means, and at last returned
to me again, because my mode of treatment appeared to be most suitable
to the disease. When I have failed in a cure, I have succeeded in
alleviating the pain and misery attendant upon such a dreadful
disease, and frequently retarded its progress.

I have thought proper to be thus explicit on the nature and cure of
cancer, and instead of vainly boasting of my success, I have candidly
expressed my opinions on the subject.




ON SCURVY,

_Scorbutic, and other Cutaneous Affections._


These generally originate in the use of unwholesome food, want of
cleanliness, and want of exercise; and sometimes from an hereditary
predisposition. They are also frequently dependent on a disordered or
deranged state of the stomach, liver, and bowels, and are often
attended with great debility and depression of spirits. They generally
appear most evident in cold and moist seasons; and, I may add, that
since the introduction of vaccination, I think cutaneous cases have
increased in number. The scurvy, by neglect or improper treatment, may
advance to such an alarming degree, in some constitutions, as to
endanger the patient's life; and I have seen and treated other
cutaneous diseases which were very closely allied to leprosy--the
legs, arms, thighs, and, in fact, the whole body, being covered with
scales, and the necessary movements of the patient would cause the
diseased parts to crack, and discharge blood, or a thin, acrid, and
burning ichor; yet, under all these circumstances, I have been
particularly successful in the treatment of these cases; a great
variety of them having yielded to the mode which I have suggested to
the sufferers, after many other means had been tried in vain.




CASES.

"Facts are stubborn things."


1.

Mr. WILLIAM WELHAM, of Culford, Suffolk, about 47 years of age, was
afflicted for several years with a violent scorbutic eruption, which
covered the whole face, accompanied with redness and chronic
inflammation; white scales or thin scabs frequently formed, and after
they had dropped off others formed successively. He had had the advice
of several respectable practitioners, and had used the preparations of
two chemists, without producing any good effect. In this state he
applied to J. Kent, Stanton, under whose treatment Mr. Welham
perfectly recovered. It is now ELEVEN YEARS since, and he has had no
return of the disease.


2.

In consequence of the benefit which Mr. Welham had received from the
treatment adopted by J. Kent, he placed his son Joseph under his care.
He was about 19 years of age, and had a scrofulous tumour in the left
arm-pit; it had been about twelve months standing before he
discovered the nature of the complaint; and time had thus been allowed
for the arm to become considerably affected. However, under the system
pursued by J. Kent a perfect cure took place; and Mr. Welham and his
son are still living at Culford in good health, and free from any
remains of the disease.


3.

Mr. JOSEPH ADAMS GODFREY, of the Ferry House, West Row, Mildenhall,
Suffolk, from an hereditary taint had been subject to scrofula about
the face and glands of the neck for a considerable time; and, from the
unabated progress of the disease, his health was materially affected.
All the usual means had been resorted to in order to check its
progress; but the disease still increased, and became more and more
formidable. He then applied to J. Kent; the progress of the complaint
was soon arrested; and a permanent cure was accomplished. This was 20
years ago, and Mr. G. has had no relapse. Mr. G. resides as above; and
from his own sufferings, and from observation of the disease in
others, he has acquired some little judgment in discriminating
scrofulous cases.


4.

JAMES BENNETT was placed under the care of J. Kent, by the
churchwardens and overseers of Buxhall, Suffolk. He was afflicted with
scrofulous disease of the left side of the lower jaw, neck, and face.
The jaw was rendered immoveable, so that he could not take any solid
food; and the liquid nourishment he was compelled to suck through an
opening left from the extraction of a tooth. He had become remarkably
weak and low, and his constitution was daily giving way under the
severity of the attack. However, by attending to the rules
recommended by J. Kent, the jaw was soon set at liberty, and he
perfectly recovered. This was _twelve_ years ago, and he is still
living at Buxhall in the enjoyment of good health.


5.

Upwards of two years since the friends of a young Lady, about 13 years
of age, became exceedingly alarmed in consequence of her left breast
having become very much enlarged, with an ulcer of considerable size
situated in the centre. She suffered much from darting, piercing pains
in the part affected, and which extended into the arm-pit; and from
its continuance and gradually getting worse, her friends were afraid
it was of a cancerous nature. They then applied to J. Kent, who
dispelled their fears by candidly telling them it was not cancer,
although the symptoms were sufficiently alarming. She strictly
attended to the system prescribed by J. Kent, and in less than three
months was perfectly well, and is still enjoying good health, and free
from any vestige of the complaint--Any person wishing for further
information may have the name and address of the patient on
application to J. Kent.


6.

ELIZABETH TAYLOR, of Haveningham, Suffolk, about 30 years of age, was
severely afflicted with scrofulous disease of the left side of the
face; the eye was completely closed--the jaw set fast--and the whole
side of the face much discoloured. She had been suffering a length of
time in great pain and misery, not being able to take sufficient food
scarcely to support nature; and from this cause, and the ravages of
the disease, her constitution had suffered material injury. All the
usual means were tried without avail, and J. Kent was requested, by a
highly respectable clergyman in the neighbourhood, to visit her. He
did so; and found her in the condition above described. J. K.
immediately commenced his peculiar mode of treatment, and in a very
short time the sight of the eye was restored, the jaw-bone became
released, and the face perfectly sound and well.--J. Kent understands
she is since married, and living near Norwich; but her friends are
still residing at Haveningham, and will satisfactorily answer any
inquirer.


7.

SARAH WILLIAMS, daughter-in-law of Mr. Abraham Harvey, bricklayer,
Long Brackland, Bury St. Edmund's, aged about nine years, had been
afflicted for upwards of five years with a violent scorbutic humour on
the head and behind the ears; and both the eyes were so much affected
with scrofulous inflammation, that she could not bear the light upon
them, and the discharge and irritation rendered her situation quite
miserable. After the best advice had been procured in vain, she was
perfectly cured by J. Kent in a very short period of time; and,
although two years have elapsed, she has had no return of the
complaint. Her friends will furnish any further information which may
be required, with great pleasure.


8.

JOHN GOODING, Gent., Brook Street, Ipswich, now about 70 years of age,
had a severe attack of scrofula on the right thigh; he was brought
over from Ipswich to Stanton, when J. Kent found the thigh swollen to
an enormous size, attended with considerable inflammation, and with a
large quantity of matter formed between the muscles and integuments.
The pain was excruciating, and his health had declined extremely; and
it was with the greatest difficulty that he was moved about. He had
had the very best medical attention, without producing any good
effect; but by taking the medicines, and using the applications
prepared by J. Kent, and paying strict attention to the injunctions
laid down by him, suppuration soon took place, and the discharge was
excessive. The health soon began to improve, the parts affected
assumed a favourable aspect, and in three months he was perfectly
well; and although 20 years have passed over, Mr. G. has had no return
of the disease. Mr. G. is still residing as above, and always
communicative on the happy termination of his case.


9.

PHILIP MORLEY, of Mildenhall, Suffolk, about 17 years of age, applied
to J. Kent, at the Half Moon Inn, Bury, in consequence of scrofulous
disease of the back. It was hereditary, and he complained of much
weakness in the back, and had a very languid appearance. On examining
the back, there was an ulcer situated on the spine, just below the
shoulder, which discharged a thin whitish ichor. It had been about 12
months' standing, and had rendered him nearly incapable of following
his business as a tailor; and it appeared to be fast bringing him to
the grave. However, by a steady attention to the means prescribed by
J. Kent, he soon found himself better, and a perfect cure was the
result. He is now living in London; several of his connexions are very
respectable, and reference may be had by applying to J. Kent.


10.

THOMAS HUNT, aged 18 years, was placed under the care of J. Kent by
the churchwardens and overseers of the parish of Norton, Suffolk. He
had been for 12 months labouring under an attack of scrofula; there
were two scrofulous ulcers on the right side the neck, and a large
tumour under the chin. By attending strictly to the plan ordered by J.
Kent, a change soon took place for the better, and in a short time the
lad was perfectly well. Three years have elapsed, and he has had no
return of the disease, continuing well, and in service. Any further
inquiries may be made of the parish-officers or of the patient.


11.

In 1811, Mr. GEORGE ROSBROOK, Saddler, of Barrow, near Bury, Suffolk,
was attacked with a scrofulous complaint in his left thumb, from
whence it removed to his left hip and thigh; from thence to the left
knee, and then into his face and the glands of his throat; from whence
issued a clear water, insomuch that he was under the necessity of
keeping a piece of sponge constantly applied to it, especially at meal
times. In this disagreeable situation, he continued for more than two
years, during which time he had taken the best medical advice the
country and London could afford, without experiencing any material
benefit; and, in April, 1814, he applied to J. Kent. Not many weeks
had elapsed, before he perceived such an alteration, as induced him to
persevere in the use of the Botanical Medicines and Applications till
the following September, when he was perfectly cured. And although
_nineteen_ years have intervened, no relapse has taken place.


12.

In 1811, RICHARD WHITBY, of Ipswich applied to J. Kent, afflicted with
scrofula in the right side of the face, attended with great swelling,
and the jaw-bone was entirely set fast. The pain he endured deprived
him of rest, and rendered him incapable of work. At length a place
broke in the inside of the mouth, and discharged very offensive
matter, and several tumours also gathered under the jaw, and on the
same side of the neck, and terminated in wounds. However, by the use
of the Botanical Medicines, he soon obtained relief, and in a short
time was perfectly well, and continues so to the present time (1833.)
_Twenty-two_ years have elapsed since the cure was effected.
Residence--near the Rose Inn, St. Peter's Street, Ipswich.


13.

In 1826, Mr. WILLIAM RUFFELL, farmer, Cockfield, Suffolk, about 21
years of age, applied to J. Kent, grievously afflicted with an
extensive scrofulous wound, in the right arm-pit. The effect of the
Botanical Medicines may be learned from a perusal of the following
extract of a letter, which Mr. R. publicly addressed to J. K. in
1817:--


"_I now enjoy a good state of health, and the perfect use of all my
limbs, which I attribute, under Providence, to your superior skill and
judgment. And surely I have great reason to do so, for it was not till
after I had tried every means in my power, and expended large sums of
money to no good purpose; it was not till my life was despaired of,
that I applied to you. I soon experienced the good effects of your
advice, and the wonderful efficacy of your incomparable Medicines, and
I think myself in duty bound, for the good of the country at large,
and in justice to your well-merited reputation, to give this public
testimony_."


Mr. Ruffell has now been well more than _fifteen_ years.


14.

In 1820, JOHN FAIERS, of Badwell Ash, Suffolk, aged about 45, was
placed under the care of J. Kent, by the parishioners of that parish,
afflicted with a violent scorbutic humour on the upper lip and face;
several tumours were also formed on and about the glands of the neck.
The case had been some time standing, and had hitherto resisted the
usual remedies; however, by a steady perseverance in the use of the
Botanical Medicines and Applications, the tumour dispersed, and the
virulence of the scorbutic humour was completely subdued; he speedily
recovered, and continues well to the present time.


15.

JOHN HAWES, of Badwell Ash, Suffolk, was placed under the care of J.
Kent, by the Parishioners of that Parish, in 1812, when he was
afflicted with Scrofula in his thigh, the left foot, the arm, and
other arts of his body, and his constitution was much impaired by the
severity and long continuance of the disease. In a short time his
health improved, by the use of the Botanical Medicines--by a steady
perseverance he ultimately recovered, and since that period, he has
been capable of laborious employment. During the cure, 23 pieces of
bone were extracted from the ulcerated parts, viz. three from the
thigh, five from the arm, and fifteen from the foot.

The said J. Hawes still continues well.


16.

_To Mr. John Kent, Stanton, Suffolk._

SIR,--The great benefit which I have received from your invaluable
Medicines and Applications, induces me to lay my own case before the
public. In October, 1826, I applied to you, in consequence of being
afflicted with a scrofulous disease of the left side of the glands of
the neck. I am about 30 years of age, and for a considerable time I
suffered severely with the above complaint. There was an ulcer on the
left side of the neck--the glands were much enlarged--and there was
much discharge into the mouth from an ulcer on the jaw. Every means
which regular aid could suggest were tried in vain, and the part was
opened, but as no visible improvement took place, and finding my
health began to decline very rapidly, I resolved to try the effect of
your Medicines. In a very short time I got better, my health improved,
and by proper perseverance in the use of the Medicines, the ulcers in
my neck healed, the swelling dispersed, and I got perfectly well, and
I am glad to say that I continue so to the present time. I shall be
happy to furnish further particulars of this case to any enquirer.

Z. MEADOWS, Cooper. _Walsham-le-Willows_, June, 19, 1827.

P.S.--Mr. Meadows still continues well.--_J. K._


17.

Mrs. SMITH, wife of Thomas Smith, ostler at the Suffolk Hotel Inn,
Ipswich; and her brother, Mr. William Freeman, of Stonham Aspal,
Suffolk, were both afflicted with Scrofula: Mr. Freeman had suffered
for several years with two scrofulous wounds on his face; and Mrs.
Smith with scrofulous enlargement of the glands of the neck: after
trying all the usual means for a considerable time without any good
effect, they both applied to J. Kent, who effected a permanent cure in
both cases.


18.

WILLIAM THOROUGHGOOD, of Great Ashfield, Suffolk, aged about 46 years,
applied to J. Kent in October 1830, in consequence of having
_nineteen_ scrofulous ulcers on the throat and chest, which had been a
considerable time standing; by a steady attention to the directions
laid down by J. K. for a few months, he was perfectly cured; and has
continued so to the present time--July 1833.


19.

Miss EMILY MURTON, of Sandy Downham, near Brandon, Norfolk, about 23
years of age, applied to J. Kent, at the Half Moon Inn, Bury; she was
afflicted with several scrofulous enlargements of the glands of the
neck; and a very extensive tumour on the lower part of the body; she
had endured the complaint for two years, and had received no relief
from any of the means which had been used for its removal; but by a
persevering attention to the treatment ordered by J. K. the tumours
were dispersed, and she got perfectly well. She is since married, and,
I understand, is living in London.--J. K.


20.

GEORGE SARGENT, of Buxhall, Suffolk, about 14 years of age, had been
some time afflicted with Scrofula on the right side of the neck; and
the collar bone was much diseased: he applied to J. Kent in March,
1833, and in the latter part of the following May, J. K. extracted an
exfoliated portion of the collar-bone, 2-3/4 inches in length; and on
the 12th of July 1833, his mother came with him to J. Kent to show
that he was quite well, and able to go after his employment. She
expressed herself extremely grateful for the services J. K. had
rendered her child.


21.

In July, 1824, WILLIAM, the Son of Mr. SIMPSON, mariner, near the
Porto Bello, Upper Orwell Street, Ipswich, about 11 years of age,
applied to J. Kent, having been for 4 years afflicted with a
scrofulous Ulcer on the right side of the face. He had been in the
Dispensary at Ipswich, and every medical means had been employed for
four years without producing any good effect, and from the long
continuance of the disease, his health became materially affected. He
then applied to J. Kent, and by a steady perseverance in the use of
the Botanical Medicines, he rapidly recovered, and has been _perfectly
well for seven years_.

N.B. Any further particulars that may be required respecting this
case, may be had by applying to the Patient, or to Mr. and Mrs.
Simpson, who will be happy to satisfy enquirers.


22.

A respectable female, in the neighbourhood of Eye, Suffolk, had been
afflicted with scrofulous disease of the glands of the neck, for a
considerable time: she had tried a variety of remedies without the
desired effect; but the disease yielded to the treatment ordered by J.
Kent. J. K. saw her a few weeks since, when she was quite well; and is
since married. Reference may be had by applying to J. Kent.

_July 21, 1833._


23.

SHADRACH SIMPSON, near the Welcome Sailor Inn, St. Clement's, Ipswich,
when about 10 years of age was afflicted with several scrofulous
tumours and ulcers on and about the neck; and his health had become
materially affected. After trying various remedies for a considerable
time without any good effect, his friends placed him under the care of
J. Kent, and by a steady attention to the treatment ordered, he soon
got perfectly well. J. K. saw his mother on the 14th of July, 1833,
when she said--"It's now 16 years ago since you cured my son, and he
continues quite well; he is a bookbinder, and now lives at Newmarket."


24.

JEMIMA BLAKE, of Wetherden, Suffolk, about 18 years of age, had been
for three years afflicted with scrofulous disease of the left ankle;
there was a large ulcer, and the whole foot and ankle much enlarged,
and attended with so much pain that she was quite a cripple; and her
constitution had become exceedingly debilitated. She had had suitable
attention, but she derived no benefit; she then applied to J. Kent,
and by attending to his instructions, her health was re-established,
and the ulcer is now quite healed, and she can walk extremely well,
and free from pain.--_July 1833._


25.

ADAM WRIGHT, of Wickhambrook, Suffolk, about 22 years of age, had been
afflicted with a scrofulous ulcer on the right side of the mouth for a
considerable time; it was so bad as to render it exceedingly difficult
for him to eat any food, except such as he took with a tea-spoon; in
this state he applied to J. Kent, and very soon received considerable
benefit; and in a letter to J. Kent, dated May 1833, he says, "I
received a perfect cure, and for the space of eleven years have
continued well."


26.

Some time since, GEORGE GOODCHILD, of Straddishall, near Newmarket,
was placed under the care of J. Kent, by the officers of that parish,
in consequence of being afflicted with Scrofula, or King's Evil. He
was about thirteen years of age, and the disease had been three years
standing, and the usual means for his recovery had been resorted to in
vain. There were two or three scrofulous ulcers on his left leg, which
was much enlarged; the bone was considerably diseased; his
constitution began to give way from the long continuance of the
disease, and he was incapable of labour. In this state he commenced
the treatment ordered by J. Kent; in a short time his constitution
became corrected and established, the leg improved, and a piece of
exfoliated bone was extracted, five inches and a half in length and an
inch in breadth, and he is now capable of following laborious
employment. In this case it is seen how prone Scrofula is to attack
the bones, which in many instances it completely destroys; here a
large piece of bone was removed before the parts got well, but this
bone was not removed simply "by the power of the Medicines alone," as
some persons would impudently and ignorantly assert, but nature, a
little mechanical assistance, and the _aid_ of suitable Medicines and
Applications, all contributed to remove this extensive exfoliation of
the tibia, or large bone of the leg.


27.

JACOB GORRARD, of Troston, in this county, had been suffering from
Scrofula for nearly two years; the right arm and left knee were very
much enlarged; there were three or four extensive wounds, and the knee
was very much contracted. He had been attended by two surgeons and a
physician, but the disease set their combined efforts at defiance, and
when J. Kent was requested to attend, the patient had been confined to
his bed for nine months, his appetite was destroyed, there were
profuse nocturnal perspirations, a hectic flush upon the countenance,
the arm, leg, and thigh, enlarged to a frightful degree, and the
wounds poured forth a copious discharge; in fact, there appeared so
little chance of doing any good, that it was with considerable
reluctance that J. Kent undertook the case. J. K. however, commenced
his peculiar mode of treatment in September, 1824, and the result was,
that a perfect cure was effected, and Gorrard is still living at
Troston, enjoying an excellent state of health, the perfect use of all
his limbs, and capable of any laborious exertion. This remarkable case
merits the attention of all those who, unfortunately, are subjects of
Scrofula. It affords a distinct proof that this unsightly and
dangerous disease may be controlled and arrested in its progress by
the use of those means so long pursued by J. Kent with unequalled
success; means which are so simple in their nature that our fields,
our hedges, and our way-sides, contribute to their composition without
resorting to metallic formulations.


28.

In 1807, JOHN PAKE, of Rickinghall, Suffolk, was placed under the care
of J. Kent, by the parishioners of that parish, having been, for
nearly all his life, subject to Scrofula. In June of that year, it
violently attacked his left knee, which was excessively painful,
swelled very much, and soon became so contracted, as to render it
useless to him. He had procured all the assistance which regular
practice could afford, but all proved ineffectual, and he was
pronounced incurable, unless amputation took place. In November
following, he began the treatment directed by J. Kent, and very soon
found relief, and by August, 1808, he was so well as to engage himself
for harvest work. _Twenty-five_ years have elapsed, and he still
continues perfectly well, and is still residing at Rickinghall.


29.

Mrs. MARY HOWLETT, wife of Mr. Thomas Howlett, farmer, of Soham,
Cambridgeshire, had been from an early period of her life, afflicted
with Scrofula; and, in 1807, the disorder violently attacked her back,
just below the blade-bone, and produced a tumour that exceeded
twenty-two inches in circumference. She was totally incapable of any
employment, the pain was excessive, and the case truly alarming.
Having had the best advice that could be procured for her, without
producing any good effect, she committed herself wholly to the care of
J. Kent, under whose treatment the tumour soon suppurated, and
discharged upwards of _three quarts_ of matter the first time, and not
less than _two gallons_ before the cure was completed. Since then,
more than _twenty-four_ years have elapsed, and she continues
perfectly sound and well.


30.

A professional inhabitant of Bury had suffered severely from a
scorbutic eruption, affecting nearly the whole body; after trying a
great number of remedies for a considerable time without deriving any
benefit, he applied to J. Kent; by attending to whose instructions, he
was perfectly cured. Reference may be had on a personal application to
J. Kent.


31.

About twelve months ago, Mr. ADAMS, (Park-keeper to his Grace the Duke
of Grafton) of Euston, Suffolk, placed his daughter under the care of
J. Kent, in consequence of her having been for some time afflicted
with a scrofulous enlargement of the left knee; indeed, the knee was
so much diseased and contracted that she could not walk without the
assistance of crutches. Her friends closely attended to the directions
of J. Kent, who a few days since saw her father, when he said that his
daughter had thrown away her crutches, and was running about in good
health.

_August 1, 1833._


32.

In March, 1826, MARY ANN BAKER, of Rattlesden, Suffolk, about 11 years
of age, was brought to J. Kent by the order of the Churchwardens and
Overseers of that parish. She was hereditarily predisposed to
Scrofula, and at this period had a tumour about the size of a hen's
egg on each breast; she had also _twenty_ ulcers on the breast and
neck, besides _twelve_ ulcers on the right arm: she had been in this
state upwards of two years; but by a steady perseverance in the use of
the medicines, and under the directions of J. Kent, she received a
perfect cure.

_I saw her September 14, 1833, when I found she continued perfectly
well; in good health and spirits._--J. KENT.


33.

In case 14, page 24, of this pamphlet, the case of
JOHN FAIERS of Great Ashfield, Suffolk, is described; and it is again
adverted to in order to shew the hereditary nature of Scrofula, which
is remarkably developed in several members of his family; no less than
four of his children having been attacked with the disease: 1. His son
_John_ suffered from it in the groin and on the thigh; 2. His daughter
_Sophia_ about the neck and windpipe; 3. _Sarah_ was also afflicted
with it; 4. _Mary_ had several Scrofulous ulcers on the leg; these
were all patients of J. Kent, and received a perfect cure from the
treatment adopted by him.


34.

WILLIAM NUNN, of Lawshall, near Bury St. Edmund's, about eighteen
years of age, applied to J. Kent, in May, 1832, in consequence of
having a Scrofulous enlargement on the left side the lower jaw: the
part affected had assumed an alarming appearance; but by steadily
attending to the directions ordered, a perfect cure was the result;
and his father informed J. Kent about three weeks since that he
continued quite well.

_July 27, 1833._


35.

A young lady belonging to one of the most respectable families in the
vicinity of Stanton, had suffered for some time from scrofulous
disease of the left hand; and as her parents were in affluent
circumstances, no expense was spared in procuring the best surgical
advice in the kingdom; this, however, was to no effect, and she was
placed under the care of J. Kent, under whose treatment twenty-five
pieces of bone were extracted from the diseased part; and although her
health had become much impaired, she speedily improved, and ultimately
a perfect cure took place. Seventeen years have now elapsed, and she
has not had the least symptom of a relapse.

N.B.--Any respectable person may have reference to the family, on a
personal application to J. Kent.


36.

JOHN STEBBINGS, Gardener, Rickinghall, Suffolk, in February 1830, took
his son James, about 4 years of age, to J. Kent. The child had two
scrofulous tumours on the left fore-arm; a large one on the right
thigh; and one on the calf of the right leg: the disease had been
about 9 months standing, and his health was much impaired. He had not
been under the care of J. K. but a short time before his health was
materially improved; and the tumours suppurated, healed, and got
completely well. He is now in good health and has had no return of the
disease.

_July 30, 1833._

       *       *       *       *       *

After the reader has candidly and attentively perused the above cases,
I trust it will not appear to be necessary for me to extend the number
any farther, although it would be perfectly easy to do so. I presume
enough has been stated to show the superiority of my mode of
treatment; and if there be any who can rise from the perusal of these
cases, and doubt that superiority, they "would not be persuaded though
one rose from the dead."

In conclusion, I would beg to state that many who have experienced the
good effects of my treatment of scrofulous diseases, frequently have
recourse to some of the medicine every spring and autumn, as an
alterative and a preventive. This prudent, cautious conduct, I would
strongly recommend to all parents, guardians, and heads of families,
who have any reason to apprehend the disorders of their children, or
those under their care, to arise from a scrofulous predisposition; and
by such timely care they may prevent those dreadful consequences which
too frequently arise from neglect or improper treatment.

J. KENT.

N.B. J. KENT thinks it necessary to inform the public that he has no
connection with any person in Stanton, or elsewhere, and that he may
be consulted at his own house in Stanton, _every Tuesday_; at the Half
Moon Inn, Bury St. Edmund's, _every Wednesday_; at the Suffolk Hotel
Inn, Ipswich, and at the King's Head Inn, Stowmarket, once a month;
and frequently at the Bell Inn, Thetford; and at the White Lion Inn,
Eye.

P.S. J. K. requests that all Letters intended for him may be _post
paid_, and addressed to _J. Kent, Stanton, near Ixworth, Suffolk_.

       *       *       *       *       *

KENT'S
CELEBRATED
_VEGETABLE ANTI-BILIOUS PILLS_

Have now been before the public a period of fourteen years, after ten
years' experience in private practice, of their salutary effect in a
variety of instances; and their increasing demand unquestionably
proves their superior efficacy in rousing the action of the liver, and
cleansing the stomach of slime and acid matter. The proprietors offer
them in full confidence that they will generally answer the purpose
for which they are intended, and be found an excellent remedy in all
obstructions of the bowels and disorders of the stomach, arising
either from a redundancy of bile, or a deficiency of that important
secretion; from flatulency, indigestion, or cold. In the sick
head-ache, the speedy relief they give is wonderful; and they are
particularly calculated to strengthen the digestive organs. They
promote the powers of digestion, create appetite, disperse flatulence
in the stomach and bowels, and in a little time remove all the painful
effects of crudities, indigestion, and habitual costiveness. They are
gentle, but safe and certain in their operation, offering no
impediment to business, and are not liable to leave any disposition to
costiveness. The proprietors pledge themselves that the pills do not
contain a single particle of mercury, antimony, or any other mineral,
but that their composition is _purely vegetable_.

The pills are prepared only, and sold by the sole Inventors and
Proprietors, at their own house in Stanton, in Suffolk, in boxes 1s.
1d., each, duty included; and by the following authorised agents.
Thompson, Bookseller, Bury; Robinson, Bookseller, Ditto; Gall and
Nunn, Chemists, Ditto; Fitch, Chemist, Ipswich; Cupiss, Chemist, Diss;
Chapman, Chemist, Thetford; Breeze, Chemist, Ditto; Woolby,
Bookseller, Stowmarket, and by most respectable Medicine Vendors.




INDEX TO THE CASES.

                                                   PAGE.

Adams, Mr. Euston                                     32

Baker, Mary Ann, Rattlesden                           32

Bennett, James, Buxhall                               19

Blake, Jemima, Wetherden                              28

Faiers, John, Badwell Ash                             24

Faiers, John, Children of                             32

Godfrey, Mr. Joseph Adams, Mildenhall                 19

Goodchild, George, Straddishall                       29

Gooding, John, Gent., Ipswich                         21

Gorrard, Jacob, Troston                               30

Hawes, John, Badwell Ash                              25

Howlett, Mrs. Mary, Soham                             31

Hunt, Thomas, Norton                                  22

Meadows, Z., Walsham-le-Willows                       25

Morley, Philip, Mildenhall                            22

Murton, Miss Emily, Sandy Downham                     26

Nunn, William, Lawshall                               33

Pake, John, Rickinghall                               30

Rosbrook, Mr. George, Barrow                          23

Ruffell, Mr. William, Cockfield                       24

Sargent, George, Buxhall                              27

Simpson, Shadrach, Ipswich                            28

Simpson, William, Ipswich                             27

Smith, Mrs., Ipswich                                  26

Stebbings, John, Rickinghall                          34

Taylor, Elizabeth, Haveningham                        20

Thoroughgood, William, Great Ashfield                 26

Welham, Joseph, Culford                               18

Welham, Mr. William, Culford                          18

Whitby, Richard, Ipswich                              23

Williams, Sarah, Bury St. Edmund's                    21

Wright, Adam, Wickhambrook                            29


INDEX TO THE CASES TO WHICH PRIVATE REFERENCE MAY
BE HAD.

                                                    PAGE

Professional Inhabitant of Bury                       31

Respectable Female in the neighbourhood of Eye        27

Young Lady in the vicinity of Stanton                 33

_Ditto, 13 years of age_                              29





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Observations on the Causes, Symptoms,
and Nature of Scrofula or King's Evil, Scurvy, and Cancer, by John Kent

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCROFULA OR KING'S EVIL ***

***** This file should be named 23468.txt or 23468.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/4/6/23468/

Produced by Bryan Ness, David T. Jones and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
