The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Boy Scouts with the Motion Picture
Players, by Robert Shaler

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Boy Scouts with the Motion Picture Players

Author: Robert Shaler

Release Date: July 19, 2004 [EBook #12948]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MOTION PICTURE PLAYERS ***




Produced by Jim Ludwig





THE BOY SCOUTS WITH THE MOTION PICTURE PLAYERS
By
Robert Shaler




CONTENTS

CHAPTERS
    I. The Haunted Make-Believe "Castle"
   II. Creating a Panic
  III. Taking Possession
   IV. Scouting at Midnight
    V. A Startling Surprise
   VI. Guests at the Camp Fire
  VII. Faced by a Mystery
 VIII. As in the Days of Chivalry
   IX. With the Motion-Picture People
    X. The Assault on the "Castle"
   XI. Imitation and Reality
  XII. When Swords Clashed
 XIII. Well Done, Scouts!
  XIV. Oakvale Gets a Thrill




CHAPTER I

THE HAUNTED MAKE-BELIEVE "CASTLE."


It was about the middle of a fall afternoon, and Friday at that, when
five well-grown lads, clad in faded khaki suits that proclaimed them
to be Boy Scouts, dropped down upon a moss covered log near a cold
spring at which they had just quenched their thirst.

The one who acted as leader, and to whom the others often deferred,
answered to the name of Hugh.  He was, indeed, Hugh Hardin, assistant
scout master; and the others were also full-fledged members of the
Oakvale Boy Scout Troop of which so much has been written and told.

Those fortunate readers who are familiar with previous volumes in
this series need no introduction to these lively lads.

For the benefit of others who have not up to this time made their
acquaintance, it may be said that the boy next to Hugh was Alec Sands;
the stout, rosy-cheeked fellow with the beaming face, Billy Worth;
the slender one, Arthur Cameron; and the uneasy chap "Monkey" Stallings,
so nicknamed on account of his pet hobby for hanging by his toes from
the cross-pieces of telegraph poles, or the lofty limbs of forest trees.

It might also be noted further that Hugh was known as a fine all-round
scout; Arthur's leading specialty lay in the line of amateur surgery,
at which he was wonderfully proficient; Alec gave the leader a pretty
good race in nearly every line of scout activity, while Billy,---well,
to be frank, Billy's strong points might be set down as an everlasting
fund of cheery good-nature, and a remarkable capacity for stowing away
"grub."

Apparently the boys were out on some sort of fall hike.  Each had
burdened himself not only with a pack but a blanket as well, the latter
secured, after the usual military habit, across one shoulder.

Each fellow also depended on a stout staff that, in a way, answered
for an Alpine stock, should they have to climb any hills.  Besides, it
was handy as a weapon of defense in case they were attacked by a
vicious dog.

"Well, the time limit you set has come, Alec," Hugh was saying after
they had stretched themselves along the convenient log.

"Yes," burst out Billy, eagerly, "you promised to tell us all what
you confided to Hugh before he agreed to get up this little weekend
hike.  I'm burning with curiosity to know what's in the wind."

"We've taken a leap in the dark, you see," added Arthur, "because
when Hugh said it would be well worth our while we just trusted him.
Now, open up, Alec, and relieve our suspense.  You said the next time
we stopped you'd begin to explain all this dark mystery."

"Me, too," exclaimed the Stallings boy, who was always turning his
restless eyes upward, as though seeking some enticing branch where he
could exercise his favorite antics.

Alec Sands laughed softly.

"I'm ready to tell my little story, boys," he remarked.  "It isn't such
a wonderful one, after all, but Hugh agreed with me that it might give
some of us an excuse for coming up this way.  And my aunt had supplied
all the necessary funds covering our railroad fare from Oakvale to the
little station where we jumped off the local train---Scarsdale."

"Which aunt, Alec?" demanded Billy, whom it was always difficult to
suppress.

"Oh! none of you ever met _this_ relative of mine, I guess," considered
Alec.  "Aunt Susan is a very rich woman, and what you might call
eccentric if you wanted to be particularly nice, and not use a harsher
word.  In fact, her nerves have gone back on her, and every little
noise about sets her _wild_.  She has taken a notion that the only
salvation for her is to find some sort of a quiet country home in
which her servants can glide around in felt slippers, with never a
rooster's crow to disturb the dead silence."

"Whew! you must mean she's a regular crank, Alec---excuse me for
saying it!" exclaimed Billy, wiping his heated brow, for when others
were shivering the fat boy perspired.

"Well, forget that part of it," resumed Alec, making a wry face.  "Aunt
Susan is peculiar, and immensely wealthy, so that money needn't stand
in the way of her doing anything she fancies.  In some way or other it
seems she heard about a queer place away up here in the woods.  It is
known as Randall's Folly!"

"Why, seems to me I've heard something about that place!" burst out
Arthur Cameron, in a surprised tone.  "Isn't it a modern castle built
by a man years ago and meant to look like some British place in the
days of Queen Elizabeth?"

"Just what it is, Arthur," chuckled Alec, as though highly amused.

"Let's see," pursued the other, uneasily, "there was some sort of
story told in connection with the castle---strikes me folks said it
was haunted, or something like that."

"Whew! and are we heading for that beautiful spot as fast as we can
hike along?" demanded Billy, his eyes round with wonder, perhaps
uneasiness.

"My aunt wrote to my mother that she wanted some one to come up here
and investigate, so she could have a full description before going
any further into the deal for the property.  Not that Aunt Susan bothered
a bit about the ghost part of it, but she wanted to know whether the
building was a ramshackle affair, or part-way decent.  In fact, she
asked for photographs of the place inside and out, and even requested
that, if I could be induced to take the trip, along with some of those
wonderfully bright chums of mine of whom she had been hearing such
great stories, I was to buy the best camera that fifty dollars could
command, and use the balance of the hundred for other expenses.  So
here we are close to Randall's Folly, with Saturday ahead of us for
business, and meaning to go back home Sunday afternoon."

"Which lovely programme must include two nights spent under the roof
of a haunted house!" gasped Billy, still wiping his streaming forehead,
though he really should have been cooled off by this time.

"For my part," spoke up Arthur Cameron, "nothing would please me better
than the chance to say I'd run across a real ghost.  I've been reading
lots of creepy stories connected with spooks, but they never could get
me to believe in such silly things."

"Same here," added the Stallings boy, though his voice sounded a trifle
unsteady as Hugh could not help noticing.

"As for me," the scout master remarked, "I considered it a fine chance
for a little excitement.  I, too, had heard some stories about this
gloomy make-believe castle that had been built in the lonely woods
by old Judge Randall when he married a young wife, and wanted to carry
her away from the rest of the world.  They say it's getting to be an
interesting ruin by now, though perhaps Alec's aunt might choose to
patch the crumbling walls up, if other things suited her."

"Huh! takes all sorts of freaks to make this world," grunted Billy.
"The idea of anybody actually wanting to bury themselves away up
here, and never see a thing in the way of circus, baseball, winter
hockey, Boy Scout rivalries and other good happenings.  The old Judge
must have been crazy."

"Well, lots of people suspected it when he started to build this
castle," said Alec, drily.  "They felt dead sure after it happened;
for hold your breath now, fellows, because to be honest with you there
was a terrible tragedy, and after the poor young wife was buried the
judge lived as much as ten years in an asylum.  He had become a maniac,
you see, from jealousy of his beautiful wife."

"I suppose it's all right, since there are four other fellows along,"
Billy finally went on to say, "but honest Injun, if I had known all
this at the start, I don't believe I would have been so anxious to
come.  I expect that old toothache of mine would have cropped up and
kept me home."

"The walking is good down to the station, Billy," murmured Alec, "and
we were told that a freight-train would come along around dark this
evening, bound south, which was due to stop at the water-tank"

"That'll be enough for you, Alec," continued the fat boy, with a certain
amount of dignity.  "You never knew me to show the white feather, and
back down, once I put my shoulder to the wheel.  If the rest can stand
it I ought to be able to do so."

"Good for you, Billy," cried Hugh.  "Alec here ought to make you an
apology.  But since we've rested up, and there's still half a mile
to tramp, with the afternoon wearing on, suppose we make a fresh start."

Soon they were trailing along the dimly seen road, which evidently
was not used to any great extent by the few scattered farmers in that
vicinity.  Most of the talk was in connection with the weird mansion
toward which they were heading.  Alec was coaxed to relate a number
of other facts he had managed to pick up regarding its romantic history.

"Look out for signs of a high wall on the left, boys," he finally
told them.  "It may be almost hidden by vines and scrub trees by now,
I was warned.  It surrounds the whole place, though here and there
it may be broken down.  Few people after dark want to pass this place
except in a hurry, and although it's only a mile and a half from the
railroad, I don't believe tramps ever think of coming here.  You see,
most of them know the stories told about Randall's Folly, and they
steer clear of the place."

A short time afterwards Hugh's keen eyes made a discovery.

"I think the wall you mentioned lies over yonder where all that wild
tangle can be seen," he remarked, whereupon there was a hurried movement
in that direction, followed by various exclamations to the effect that
the scout master's announcement was indeed true.

"Seems as if the castle must be perched on a high piece of ground,
commanding a pretty good view of the country around," observed Arthur,
as they sought for a broken place in the crumbling wall so as to gain
an entrance to the grounds beyond.

"The story goes that Judge Randall built it that way so he could keep
watch, and know if any of his wife's former suitors were heading this
way," Alec explained.

"Why, he must have been a regular old Bluebeard!" gurgled Billy.

"He was demented on that one subject," confessed Alec, "and the disease
kept getting a stronger grip on him until finally---but hello! here's
the hole in the wall we wanted to find, so let's crawl over the
broken-down stones and enter."

"Hold on," snapped Hugh just then, "I thought you said, Alec, no one
was bold enough to trespass here!  If you look down to where I point
you'll see part of a footprint in mud, showing that a man must have
come across this broken wall not half an hour or so ago!"




CHAPTER II

CREATING A PANIC


When Hugh gave utterance to this really startling announcement, he
naturally lowered, his voice.  The others came crowding up, and stared
at the tell-tale mark.  As their scout education had long since passed
far beyond the novice range they had no difficulty in seeing that Hugh
had stated the truth.

"A whopping big foot made that mark," whispered Billy.

"And see there," added Alec, hastily, also in a low tone, "here's
a second one not so big.  Two fellows crossed this hole in the wall,
and only a short time ago, because the mud is as fresh as it can be."

That caused the scouts to exchange significant looks.

"Anyhow," Billy was heard to whisper to himself, "whoever made those
footprints was a live human being, and no spook, that's sure."

The thought evidently did much to relieve his mind, Hugh realized.  Alec
meanwhile was shaking his head as though not only puzzled but annoyed.

"What do you make of it, Hugh?" he asked, like most of the fellows
turning to the scout master when there was a difficult problem to be
solved.

"Oh! there might be several explanations," replied the other with a
reassuring smile.  "First of all, these fellows may be a couple of
curious countrymen wanting to take a look around while the sun is
still up, being afraid to come here after night sets in."

"Yes, go on, Hugh; what next?"

"Then it might be they are men who have heard about the deserted castle,
and wonder if they could pick up anything worth carrying off if they
forced an entrance.  But there's still another answer to your question,
Alec."

"I can guess what you mean, Hugh.  My aunt, it may be, isn't the only
person with money to burn who's taken a notion to buy Randall's Folly.
Is that what you've got on the tip of your tongue, Hugh?"

"Just what I meant to say," he was told. "But no matter, if we find
there's a rival in the field, perhaps we might scare him off in some
way.  That wouldn't be such a hard thing to do, when you've got a
haunted house to work with."

"Oh! with my trick of throwing my voice, Hugh," spoke up Monkey
Stallings, "I bet you I could play the ghost racket to beat the band.
Just give me a try-out and see what I can do, Hugh."

"Well, first of all," remarked the scout master, "we had better climb
over the break in the wall here, and find the trail of these two unknown
men.  After all it may turn out they are simple country jakes wanting
to take a peep at the mansion they've heard so many queer stories
about."

Accordingly the five scouts hastened to clamber across the gap, a feat
requiring little dexterity; though clumsy Billy had to catch his toe
among the stones, and come near pitching headlong down, were it not
for Hugh quickly throwing out his ready arm.

It required little effort to find the tracks beyond the mass of fallen
stones; a mere tyro of a scout could have succeeded in following such
a plain trail, and at that hardly half test his ability along that line.

Bending partly over, the boys kept diligently at work pursuing the
zigzag line of footprints.  Evidently the men had picked out the easiest
way to advance.  They must have either known where they were going, or
else followed a former path that was not overgrown, and partly
concealed with rank vegetation.

"Look! there's a glimpse of the castle!" whispered Alec, suddenly.

Through the openings in the copse beyond they could see the gray walls
rising up ahead.  It was an impressive spectacle.  The westering sun
shone on the tower that had been made to look like some old-time type
English masonry, famous in history, with its portcullis, drawbridge,
and surrounding watery ditch known as a "moat."

After silently inspecting the side of the old building thus presented
to their gaze for a minute or so, the boys began to show their former
restlessness.

"The trail keeps right on, Hugh!" whispered Alec, which was as much as
saying that he could see no reason for further delay.

"Listen!" cautioned Arthur.

"Oh! what did you think you heard?" asked Billy, with a gasp.

"It must have been voices somewhere ahead of us," came the answer.  "The
men are talking it over, most likely."

"Debating whether they've got the nerve to go a step further and enter
the haunted castle," chuckled Alec.  "Let's move on, and get a squint
at the bold trespassers, Hugh."

Accordingly once more the whole party started to move ahead, foot by
foot.  All the woodcraft they had managed to pick up in previous
exploits was brought into play as they crept along softly.

"Stop!" Hugh gave the low order, finally.

"I see them, Hugh," announced Alec, eagerly.

"Show me where," begged Billy, pushing himself forward.

A few seconds later Arthur was heard to say disdainfully:

"Why, it looks to me as if they might be only a pair of Weary Willies,
who had wandered up here from tramping the railroad ties.  They must
have heard about a fine house lying idle here, and have come to camp
out for a spell.  You can see they've got a chicken dangling by the
neck, and some old tomato cans they mean to make coffee in.  Whew!
but they are a tough looking pair, I tell you."

Alec looked, and sniffed disdainfully.

"Here's where we're up against it good and hard, fellows," he remarked,
softly.  "The question is, do we want to stand for that couple of
greasy hoboes keeping us company while we camp out here in the deserted
castle?  Everybody say his mind, and majority rules, you know."

"Excuse me, if you please," muttered Arthur, with a shudder.  "I'd
sooner sleep in a pigpen than alongside such human animals as those
unclean hoboes."

"Why," remarked Billy, aghast at the thought, "they might rob us of
our blankets; or worse, of our precious grub, which would be what I'd
call a calamity without equal."

"We've just got to bounce them, that's plain," said Monkey Stallings.
"Hugh, you remember what you the same as promised me?"

"Oh! if you think you can start something that will rid us of the
pair," the scout master told him, "go to it right away.  If you want
us to help, say the word, Monkey."

Already the other was feverishly attacking his pack, which he had
tossed upon the ground.  He soon found what he was looking for, to
judge from the satisfied exclamation that passed his lips.

"Tell us what you've got there, Monkey," urged Alec.

"Yes, that's do," added Billy, anxiously, "because we want to be on
our guard.  If it throws a scare into those tramps it might work just
as bad with some other fellows I know, unless they were warned
beforehand.  Show your hand, Monkey, please."

"Oh! shucks!  it's only a sort of wild-goose call I tried to make
from directions I read in a little book," confessed the ingenious
one.  "It don't seem to imitate a wild honker much, but say, I c'n
make the most _unearthly_ sounds come out of this hollow bone you
ever listened to.  Why, it nigh about freezes my own blood when I
try the call in the pitch dark.  Now watch and see what happens."

"Be careful, Monkey," warned Hugh, as the other prepared to creep
away.  "Don't let them glimpse you at any time, or there may be serious
trouble.  They look like an ugly couple of customers.  I suppose you
mean to try and get around on the other side of them?"

"Sure thing," replied the originator of the scheme, "and if I were
you, Hugh, I'd make out to hide your bunch, because, believe me, that
pair will come whooping along this way like mad pretty soon."

"Which is what we'll do right away, Monkey, never fear," Hugh told
him.

Accordingly the four scouts disposed themselves in such fashion that
while they would be hidden from view they could at the same time watch
whatever took place, and enjoy the fun, if, by good luck, the scheme
arranged for the entertainment of the bold hoboes, turned out successful.

The two ragged wanderers were sitting on the stones bordering the
ditch or "moat" that surrounded the make-believe ancient castle.
They evidently debated as to the advisability of forcing an entrance
to the wonderful mansion, and taking up temporary or permanent quarters
there.  Perhaps the idea of spending the coming winter under so
magnificent a roof, with frequent excursions around the countryside
in search of necessary supplies, engrossed their attention.

Some little time passed away.  The four boys began to show signs of
impatience, believing that Monkey Stallings must surely by now have
gained the place he had in mind when he left them.

"There, I saw him wave his hand to us from that slit in the stone wall
of the tower!" hissed Alec, presently.  "He's managed to find a way to
get inside after all, and now the fun's going to begin."

"It's time, too," added Arthur, "because the hoboes have made up their
minds to try and break into the house.  See, that big chump has picked
up a heavy rock, and he acts as if he meant to hurl the same against
those stout oaken doors."

Indeed, that was just what happened.  The collision, however, only
resulted in a loud bang, for it would take many hundreds of like blows
to do those stout doors any serious damage.  The smaller tramp shook
his head dubiously.

"Now they are talking it over again," whispered Alec.  "The short one
is pointing as if he believes they can find a much easier way to get
inside than trying to smash the door down.  Hey! Monkey, better get
busy or you'll find the pair treading close on your heels."

Hardly had Alec spoken that last low word than a thrilling sound came
floating to the ears of the four listening scouts.  None of them could
ever describe what it was like; indeed, it seemed to possess a character
all its own, and somehow caused the "goose-flesh" to creep over their
bodies, even though they knew the origin of the uncanny cry.

The two tramps had jumped back at the first outburst.  They seemed to
be staring wildly toward the "donjon tower," as Alec persisted in
calling the round structure at one end of the imitation castle.
Louder and louder grew the racket.  Billy laid a trembling hand on
Hugh's arm as though seeking comfort from personal contact with the
scout master.

Presently the pair of hoboes appeared to have reached the limit of
their endurance.  One snatched the dead fowl that had possibly been
stolen from some farmyard on their way up from the railroad; while
the other hastily gathered the rest of their primitive possessions
in his trembling hands.

Then, as another fearful burst of strange cries broke forth from the
haunted castle, the two men started wildly on the run.  Faster and
faster grew their pace as Monkey blew more furiously on his home-made
"goose-call" with telling effect.  As they passed the spot where Hugh
and the other three scouts were lying in concealment, the alarmed
pair could be heard giving vent to excited remarks, and some strong
language as well, though neither of them seemed to possess the nerve
to turn his head and look back so as to find out if they were being
pursued.

So they went out of sight along the crooked trail they had made in
approaching the deserted mansion; though for several minutes afterwards
the sound of frequent collisions with trees, and stumbles over hidden
vines proclaimed that their panic showed no signs of abating.




CHAPTER III

TAKING POSSESSION


"Don't all laugh at once," cautioned the scout master, knowing that an
outburst was imminent.

Understanding what was meant, the boys threw themselves down upon the
ground and gave way to merriment that was none the less overpowering
because it had to be indulged in "with the soft pedal on," as Arthur
artfully expressed it.

While they, were still enjoying themselves in this fashion, Monkey
Stallings joined them.  He had a huge grin on his rather odd-looking,
face, showing that he felt fully satisfied with his recent fine work.

"Say, did I do the thing up in good style, boys?" he demanded.

"I should say you did, Monkey!" burst out Billy.  "Makes me think of
one of Aesop's fables I used to read ever so long ago, about the lion
and the donkey out hunting together."

"Suppose you tell us about it then," suggested Arthur, a little wickedly,
for he had, in truth, a pretty fair idea concerning its nature.

"Why," proceeded Billy, hastily, "it seems they discovered a flock of
goats in a cave, and the donkey suggested that he disguise himself
with an old lion skin they found, and go in to scare the goats out,
when the lion standing by the exit could kill the game.  When he had
hee-hawed and kicked up such a rumpus that the poor goats dashed out,
to meet their fate at the exit, the donkey finally came along and
proudly asked the lion what he thought of his antics.  'Splendid,'
said the lion, or something like that, and I guess you'd have frightened
me, too, if I hadn't known you were only a donkey!"

Monkey Stallings hardly knew whether that, was intended for a compliment
or not, but he laughed because the others did.

"All the same I had the longest pole that knocked down the persimmons,"
he asserted.  "I gave that bunch the biggest scare of their lives.
The way is clear for us now, and, thank goodness, we won't have to
sleep under the same roof with that greasy pair of rascals, and, after
all; that was the end in view."

"Monkey," said Arthur, "you've put us all under heavy obligations by
what you did, and for one I'm not going to forget it, or twit you about
the funny noises you manage to coax out of that bone goose-call you
made.  The end justifies the means, is what I say every time.  Now,
what's next on the programme, Hugh?"

"Well, since we've met the enemy and won the fight," laughed the other,
"I should say our best move would be to occupy the abandoned works.
Monkey can lead us to where he managed to get into the castle."

"As easy as falling off a log," asserted the other, proudly, as became
the principal actor in the late little "unpleasantness."

"Besides," added Alec, impatiently, "we want to take a few pictures
inside and out of the old shebang while the sun still hangs high."

"What's the hurry?" asked Billy, who liked to put off things to a
more convenient season whenever he could find half of an excuse; "plenty
of time to do all that to-morrow, I should think."

"'Strike while the iron is hot,' has always been my motto," asserted
Alec, when, in truth, it was mostly his impatience that hastened his
actions.  "How do we know what sort of a day to-morrow may turn out to
be?  Suppose a storm came along, how could I get a good picture of the
castle to send my aunt so as to pay for the elegant camera she gave me?"

"Guess you're right there, Alec," admitted Billy, always ready to own
up when he felt that the argument was going against him.  "Besides,
it needs plenty of light to get views inside the house, when the windows
are as small and measly as they seem to be here."

"Oh! as for that," declared the other, airily, "leave it to me.  I've
been smart enough to fetch along an entire outfit for taking flashlight
pictures; so you see we can get all we want after night comes."

"You've certainly got a level head on your shoulders, Alec," ventured
Arthur, giving the other a slap on the back that was intended for
commendation, though it made the recipient jump, for he had not been
expecting anything of the sort, and possibly there was that about
the air of that haunted mansion which caused all of them to be a bit
more nervous than usual.

Monkey Stallings led them around to one side of the rambling building.
As they went, they were loud in their expressions of amazement and
even delight, for really, it was an impressive sight to the eyes of
American lads not accustomed to crumbling ruins of old-time castles,
where doughty knights of the Middle Ages may have fought in tournament
with lance and sword.

"Wait up a bit, please, fellows!" suddenly exclaimed Alec.  "I couldn't
find a better view of the castle than right here, with that sun blazing
along the walls, the turrets and that magnificent donjon tower.  I
want every one of you to be in the picture at that, so place yourselves
as I tell you."

Alec was something of a photographer, and had many good views in a
book at home.  He fully expected to do wonderful things with this
expensive outfit, since the lens alone cost three times as much as
his other camera complete.

When he had snapped off several views he declared himself satisfied.

"In the morning, if the weather holds good," he remarked as he gave
them the "high sign" that he was through, and that they need not pose
any longer, "I mean to pick up a couple of views from the other side.
The morning sun will allow me to do that, you understand.  And now,
Monkey, where did you climb inside?"

They were soon able to gain the interior after the same manner in
which the pilot of the exploring expedition had accomplished it.
Monkey's sharp eyes had discovered a small opening that might be called
a slit in the solid wall, after the fashion of those to be seen in
the dwellings of Moors and Arabs and Turks.  It was easy enough for
each boy in turn to squeeze himself through that slender gap, though
once there arose a serious doubt in Billy's mind as to whether he
would not stick fast, and have to be pushed through with a rammer,
much to his bodily discomfort.

Two fellows behind assisted his progress, while the others in advance
gave him a helping hand, so that finally Billy gained his end, though
he could long afterwards be seen ruefully rubbing his elbows and hips
as though they had been scraped in the passage.

After that they left their packs in one of the lower apartments, while
they roamed all through the wonderful interior.  Apparently money
had not been spared in the erection of an imitation castle, though
Hugh found, in some places where what was supposed to be solid rock,
proved to be only wood, skillfully painted to resemble the more lasting
material.

"Whew! it has about forty rooms all told, I should say," observed
the steaming Billy after they had wearied of wandering about the strange
place, and came back to the apartment where their blankets and packs
had been deposited.

"Wonder how Aunt Susan will like the blooming old shack?" Alec was
heard to say as though some doubt had already commenced to enter his
mind.

"You, said, she wanted it quiet, you know, Alec," observed Hugh.
"I defy any one to find a place that fills that bill better than
this one.  Why, not even the peep of a bird can be heard; it's just
a brooding silence that would get on the nerves of most people and
make them shout out loud."

"Let's hope it stays that way while we're up here," said Billy, and
then noticing that some of the other fellows were smiling broadly
he hastened to add: "Oh! it isn't that I really expect anything like
a ghost to walk when it comes midnight, you understand, but I don't
always sleep as sound as I would like, and I hate to have anything
screechy wake me up.  So, Monkey, please keep that goose-call of yours
in your pocket the rest of the time."

"Perhaps, we had better get ourselves comfortably fixed before night
finds us," suggested Hugh.  "We can make a blaze in that fireplace
and cook supper here as nice as any one would want.  It's going to
turn out a novel experience for the lot of us."

"You bet it, will," asserted Monkey Stallings stoutly.  "I always
did think I'd like to spend just one night in a house they said was
haunted.  To tell you the honest-truth I'm real glad you asked me
to come along, Alec, even if there does seem to be a queer feeling
running up and down my backbone.  I never knew the like before save
that time I was dared to walk through the graveyard at midnight, and
some fellows tried to scare me with their old sheets.  Huh!  I had
made sure to carry Tige, my bulldog, hid under my coat, and I just
let him loose.  It makes me sick with laughing even now when I remember
how those sillies tore off, with that pup snapping at their legs."

"I'm glad to notice," said Billy, just then, "that we can fasten both
doors to this lower room, if we feel like it.  You see, they've got
bolts that can be shot into the sockets."

"Shucks!" mocked Alec, disdainfully.  "What good are locks and bars
and bolts when they say a ghost can ooze itself in through a keyhole
even?  But then don't get an idea in your head, Billy, we're going
to be bothered by anything except rats.  That's the only kind of spooks
you'll find in such a place as this.  And after we've had our supper
I hope you'll all accompany me while I take some views of the interior,
because several of the rooms are going to make dandy pictures."

So supper was cooked after their customary camp style, only in this
instance, while the scouts had a roof overhead, and stout stone walls
surrounding them, they missed the whispering of the treetops, as well
as the star-studded sky.

Afterwards they gladly helped the aspiring photographer while he made
good use of his flashlight apparatus.  Alec chose certain apartments
in which he fancied his wealthy and eccentric aunt would be most
interested.  He also declared himself satisfied in the end that he had
succeeded in getting some views that ought to turn out "gilt-edged."

The mansion was unfurnished, so that they had no chance of finding
sleeping quarters or beds of any kind above.  Whoever now owned the
place had removed all such articles long since, possibly to prevent
tramps from finding an inducement to lodge in the deserted and lonely,
castle.

However, this was nothing serious to fellows who had camped many a
time among the rocks, where they were even debarred from having hemlock
browse for a soft mattress.

"We'll try the floor to-night, boys," said Hugh, as he started to
spread his blanket out in regulation style.  "If it proves to be too
hard for us, perhaps we can put in the second night outdoors somewhere.
That will depend on the weather, for we have no tent to keep the rain
or snow off, you remember."

The others hastened to copy his example, for they were all fairly
sleepy.  Billy told himself that he would very likely lie awake all
nightlong, because he felt sure something strange was _bound_ to happen
to them.  He was shrewd enough to arrange his blanket bed directly
in the middle, so that he had a pair of chums on either side of him.
If the others noticed this sign of weakness they kindly overlooked
it.  Perhaps, to tell the truth about it, Monkey Stallings and Arthur
Cameron were themselves not entirely free from uneasiness, and deep
down in their hearts wished the night well over with.

Hugh happened to awaken some time afterwards, and as the flames lazily
lighted up the big room occasionally, he lay there watching them play
upon the wall.  So he allowed himself to figure what strange scenes
these same rooms must have witnessed in those bygone days when the old
judge and his young prisoner wife occupied the monstrosity of an
imitation feudal castle.

When Hugh was about to turn over and compose himself to sleep, he
heard a peculiar sound that caused his heart to beat much more rapidly
than its wont.  He suddenly sat up and listened again.




CHAPTER IV

SCOUTING AT MIDNIGHT


It was certainly a queer sound that floated to the strained hearing of
the boy as he crouched there on the floor of the room amidst the folds
of his blanket and listened with might and main.

There followed a brief period of silence and then he felt a thrill,
for it came again, a peculiar whimpering that would have given Billy
a spasm of fright had he been awake to catch it, instead of calmly
sleeping close by.

"What in the mischief can it be?" whispered Hugh to himself as he
allowed his hand to grope around for something he wanted, and which
he remembered placing conveniently by at the time he prepared his
crude bed.

The fire had died down again so that the big apartment on the main
floor was almost wrapped in darkness.  Still, when tiny tongues of
flame played at hide-and-seek about the charred log, they caused all
sorts of odd shadows to run athwart the walls.

Hugh gave a grunt of satisfaction when his fingers closed upon the
object he sought.  It was only about the size of two fingers, and
nickel-plated at that.  In fact, Hugh had made himself a trifling-present
lately of a small vestpocket edition of a flashlight, controlled by
a battery, and had thought it worth while to carry it along with him
on this expedition, though not saying anything about it to the others,
thus far.

"I'm bound to find out what makes that noise, as sure as anything
can be," was what the boy was telling himself resolutely, even while
he crept out from among the folds of the warm blanket endeared to
him by reason of many associations of the past, of which so much has
been written in previous volumes.

That was just like Hugh Hardin.  A good many boys would possibly have
concluded that going wandering about a great imitation castle like
Randall's Folly, after midnight, trying to discover the origin of
strange sounds, was no business of theirs, and would have cuddled
down closer, even drawing their blanket over their heads in order
that they might not hear a repetition of the noise.

Hugh was built on a different order.  He knew full well that sleep
with him was entirely out of the question so long as that chilling
whimpering and rustling continued at regular intervals.

Now Hugh was only a boy, it must be remembered, and many a strong
man would have declined committing himself in the way the scout master
intended doing.

He had listened to all the talk about ghosts carried on by the other
fellows, with more or less interest and amusement, for Hugh refused
to believe in spook manifestations.  At the same time he admitted that
his heart was fluttering at a much more rapid gait than customary
when he started toward one of the doors of the room, using the little
electric torch to light his way.

If any one could have read the thoughts that were surging through
the boy's excited mind, they would perhaps have been found to range
about in this manner:

"Ghosts, eh?  Well, I've always said there never existed any, and
perhaps I'll have a chance right now to prove it, one way or the other.
A queer kind of a hobgoblin that must be to keep whimpering like a
baby, and then fluttering to beat the band.  But what in the wide
world can it all mean?  That's what I reckon on finding out, given
half a chance."

He had reached the door by that time.  Billy had seen to it that the
bolt was shot into its socket before he lay down.  More than that,
he had even gone to the trouble to fill the keyhole full of crumpled
paper, remembering that jibe on the part of one of his chums to the
effect that spirits can "ooze like smoke" through even such small
apertures.

Hugh had been wise enough to pick up a handy club before starting
forth upon his mission of investigation.  He did not anticipate finding
a chance to make use of it, but when a man insures his house against
fire he really does not expect it to be burned down.  Hugh wanted
to be on the safe side, that was all.

Just at that point the boy, was influenced to turn around and cast
the light of his torch upon the forms of his four comrades swathed
in their coverings.  Not one of them moved, even in the slightest
degree, so that, if Hugh was half contemplating inviting company, he
found no encouragement there.

Gritting his teeth, the boy calmly drew back the bolt, softly opened
the massive door, slipped boldly through the aperture, and then as
deftly closed the door behind him.

Standing there in the great hall he listened intently, meanwhile keeping
his light turning this way and that in order to see if anything moved.
Perhaps, in the days when Judge Randall lived in his romantic castle,
this massive hall had been decorated after the usual custom of feudal
times.  Hugh could easily imagine shining suits of armor standing
grimly in, the corners, like sentries on guard.  He had detected marks
on the walls betraying the fact that at some time they had borne all
manner of relics of long-past age of chivalry, so that the illusion
might be complete.  But now they stood there bare and cold, and a
chilly draught came down from the empty regions above that made the
boy shiver.

Then he heard the strange sounds again.  They were clearer now than
before.

"One thing certain," muttered Hugh, between his set teeth, "whatever
makes that noise it comes from up above.  And the thing for me to do
is to climb the stairs; so here goes."

If he felt any hesitation he did not show it as he made his way to
the foot of the broad stairway and commenced mounting, step after step.
Always the sounds seemed to grow a little clearer, and this fact told
Hugh his scout instinct must be truly leading him directly toward the
place from which they issued.

He had reached the second floor, and was pushing steadily onward.
Several times he stopped short to listen, nor would he make a move
at such intervals unless he had received his clue again.  Not once
did he manifest any weakness in the line of shrugging his shoulders,
and saying that it was none of his business if the night air played
pranks by forcing its way through some hole in the wall, with a whine
and a gurgle.

When Hugh once set himself a task it was his nature to carry the thing
through to the end.  He would despise himself if he allowed any weak
fear to triumph over his common-sense.

A brief time later he found himself standing near where he knew one
of the several turrets stood.  He remembered now that while they had
investigated more or less of the big building, they were forced to
skip several portions, leaving them for the next morning's survey;
and doubtless this turret chamber must have been in the list of those
unexplored places.

"Whatever it may be," Hugh was telling himself, "the thing making all
that noise is in there!  I'll listen once more, and then take a peek."

When he again heard the gurgling, the fluttering, and the strange
whimpering Hugh had his hand on the door knob.  He quickly threw the
barrier open and flashed his light into the chamber.

Instantly there was a scurry of wings.  Queer glowing balls of yellow
connected with obscure, shadowy figures stared at him.  The wings
winnowed the air, and again he caught that peculiar whinny.

Hugh laughed aloud.

"Why, it's only a family of owls after all," he said, in great relief,
"that's taken up quarters here in this turret, where they can go in
and out as they please.  Yes, and those things that flapped away must
have been some ugly bats in the bargain, that haven't gone into winter
quarters yet.  Well, this is a pretty good sell, I must say.  I'm
glad I made up my mind to find out what that noise was.  Now I guess
I can go to sleep again.  Ghosts!  Well, like as not every ghost that
ever was heard of would turn out to be as simple a thing as this, if
only some one had the nerve to investigate."

He closed the door to the turret chamber.  Let the owls and bats have
their quarters if they wanted to.  There was plenty of room in that
great castle for himself and chums to sleep without ousting, the happy
family from their roost.

So Hugh started down the stairs feeling much lighter of heart than
when he had so recently climbed upward.  The tension and strain had
been removed from his boyish heart, and he was ready to confess that
things had seemed pretty ticklish at one time, and had required all
his resolution to push ahead.

He found the right door, and softly opening it made his way into the
big room in which the others were sleeping.  While fastening the door
again Hugh could hear the regular breathing of Billy, and possibly
of the others.

As he incidentally flashed his light on them before turning in he
was surprised to see Alec Sands sitting bolt upright and watching
him curiously.  Hugh held up a warning finger.  He did not want Alec
to talk out loud and needlessly awaken all of the other fellows.
At the same time he know full well he must give some sort of explanation
for his strange absence.

"I heard it, too, Hugh," whispered Alec, with a half grin.  "Woke
up and found you gone when I put out my hand to feel your blanket.
Then I caught those awful ghoulish sounds somewhere.  Wanted to creep
after you, but say, I own up I didn't have the nerve to try it.  So
here I've been sitting, hugging my knees, and listening till I'm
shivering as if I had the ague.  Now tell me what it is, Hugh, for I
just know you've found out."

Hugh chuckled and said:

"Oh! just a family that has squatted down on these premises, and hates
to be evicted in case your rich aunt, or anybody else, buys the same!"

"Come off, Hugh; don't try to muddle me all up like that, when I'm
dying to know what could make such awful sounds.  What kind of a family
is it?"

"Owls, with a few big bats thrown in for good measure," explained Hugh.
"They've taken up their quarters in one of the turret chambers where
slits in the walls allow them to go and come as they please."

"You woke up and heard that gibberish, didn't you, Hugh?  And you
made up your mind on the spot that you just had to find out what it
meant?  It's like you to do such a thing!  But, Hugh, why didn't you
let me in on it?  I'd have been glad to keep you company, sure I would."

"I knew that, Alec," apologized the other, yawning as he began to
creep under his blanket again, "but all of you seemed to be sound
asleep, and I hated to wake anybody up.  Besides---well, I just felt
like going it alone, you see."

"Of all the nerve, you've got it to beat the band," commented Alec.
"I thought I could stand for a good deal, but let me tell you I draw
the line at creeping upstairs in this spooky old castle, and
investigating such a fierce noise as that.  Listen, will you, they're
at it again, Hugh?  Why, if Billy woke up and heard that he'd throw
a fit."

"Then we want to quit talking and not wake him," cautioned the scout
master, as he gathered the folds of his covering about him, much as
a soldier of olden times might wrap his martial cloak around his body
while settling down calmly to sleep on the battlefield.

Alec was chuckling as though something amused him.

"Tell you what," he presently whispered, as a last thought, "if my
Aunt Susan is as dead set for silence as she says, those noisy owls
are going to vacate their snug quarters up there in a hurry.  I
honestly believe, Hugh, this lonely old curiosity of a castle is going
to please my queer relative a whole lot.  The chances are she'll plank
down the money to buy Randall's Folly when she gets my report,
accompanied by the pictures I'm taking.  Well, here goes for another
nap, hoping the Owl family will settle down and not disturb us again
to-night."




CHAPTER V

A STARTLING SURPRISE


"Hello! Is it safe to come out; and is the coast clear of ghosts?"

That was Billy addressing Hugh on the following morning, the scout
master, as well as Alec Sands and Arthur Cameron, being up and around.
They looked at Billy poking his head out from amidst the folds of
his capacious red-and-black striped blanket, and laughed, for somehow
he reminded them of a cautious old tortoise trying to spy out the
land before entrusting his flippers beyond the confines of his shell.

"Nothing doing in the ghost line, Billy," Hugh told him, "so you can
stretch yourself as much as you please.  Hurry up a little!  Alec here
was just suggesting that as the morning looks so fine we might as well
go outside and build a cooking fire under the trees for a change"

Billy thereupon threw the blanket aside and hopped to his feet.

"When you say anything about _eating_," he observed as he started to
finish his dressing with feverish haste, "seems like my whole system
responds.  Alec, I want to tell you the idea isn't half bad either.
Dining in this musty old room seems too much as if we were still at
home, you know.  Nothing like being under the trees when you're taking
an outing.  I haven't got any gypsy blood in me that I know of, but I
do like the big outdoors a heap, better than anything else
going---that is, except eating."

Monkey Stallings was by this time also awake and fixing himself to defy
the chilly morning atmosphere.

They abandoned the castle, taking their belongings with them.  At the
time it was looked upon only as a little incident, and no one dreamed
that afterwards they would find themselves very thankful for having
done this very thing.

Back of the building the trees grew thickly, and it did not take the
scouts long to discover a very good location for a temporary camp,
where they could build a fire and cook breakfast.

"Another thing," said Alec, "if the weather holds good I'm going to
suggest that we hunt a place back there, half a mile, perhaps, away
from the castle, to spend the night in.  Like Billy here, I don't
fancy sleeping under a roof when I can have a chance to camp out under
the stars and hear the whispering of the trees."

The others were quick to seize upon the idea.

"It's our only chance to sleep out," said the Stallings boy, "because
we've got to make tracks to-morrow afternoon, you remember."

"I should say that Alec ought to be able to take all the pictures he
needs of this old rookery this morning," remarked Arthur.  "As for me,
I've seen all I want of the place.  It makes me feel sad, because I
can't help thinking of what happened up here so long ago.  It was a
crazy man's scheme to start with, and then there was the terrible
tragedy that happened later on.  Ugh! let's climb out right now."

So they built a nice cooking fire, and started to get breakfast.  It
was while they discussed the morning meal with the eagerness that
boys' healthy appetites alone can display, that Billy asked a leading
question.

"I forgot to ask if anybody heard a ghost laugh in the night?" he
demanded.  "Once I happened to wake up, and imagined I could hear
somebody laughing away off in the distance; but say, I only pulled
my head further under my blanket, and went to sleep again just like
an innocent little babe.  How about that, Hugh, Alec, and the rest?
Was there anything doing?"

This was the time for Alec to tell about the little adventure Hugh
had met with.  Billy's eyes grew round with wonder and awe as the
story proceeded, and seeing this, Alec did his best to keep up the
interest at fever heat to the point where Hugh burst into the haunted
turret chamber, and made the discovery that it was tenanted by a family
of owls, and some bats.

"Gee whiz!" ejaculated Billy, heaving a great sigh of relief, "I
honestly began to believe you meant to tell us that turret-tower room
was the place where the tragedy happened, and that Hugh had watched
it all being repeated over again.  Owls, hey?  Well, they're an innocent
lot when you get acquainted with 'em.  All the same, let me tell you
I'm glad we expect to sleep outdoors to-night."

"When we get through breakfast, boys," suggested Arthur, greatly
interested in what he had just heard, "let's all go up and be
introduced to Hugh's pets, if they haven't vamoosed the ranch.  I
always did like to watch owls stare at you with their big yellow eyes;
but you want to keep away, for they've got wicked beaks, and can take
a piece of skin off your hand as easy as anything."

Accordingly this programme was carried out.  The visit to the turret
chamber was not as productive of results as some of the boys might
have wished, for most of the owls and bats went scurrying forth through
the slits in the wall as soon as the door was opened, despite the
garish light of day which they were supposed to dislike.  Still, enough
were seen to satisfy Billy the story had been no "fake."

Alec said he was disappointed because he could not take a picture of
the whole outfit; though not necessarily for the benefit of his rich
aunt.

"But the sun seems just about right for the several exposures I want
to make of the southeastern side of the castle," he told them, "so
let's climb down out of this and get busy."

"I'll tell you what I think," ventured Billy as they were making for
outdoors once more.  "Like as not that same family of owls has been
responsible for a lot of that silly talk about this place being haunted.
People imagine all sorts of things, you know, when they don't understand
queer sounds."

"Yes," retorted Alec, with a chuckle, "that's so, they do, Billy; and
I've known them to pull their heads under blankets.  It's all very
well for you to talk so bravely when the sun's shining overhead; but
everybody knows how different things look and seem at midnight.  We'll
forgive you this time, Billy, because the rest of us, all but Hugh
perhaps, were in something of the same boat, I'm afraid."

The photographic work went on apace, and as Alec had in times past
proven his abilities in this line, he was apparently justified in
believing that success was going to crown his present efforts.

"I tell you Aunt Susan will be tickled half to death when she gets
prints of these pictures," he remarked again and again as he worked,
never missing a single object that he considered would lend additional
enchantment to the views.  "I ought to consider myself mighty lucky
to be presented with such a dandy camera as this.  I've made sure
to fetch my daylight developing tank along with me, because if any
of the exposures turn out to be poor ones I'll have another chance
to duplicate the same tomorrow morning, even if it is Sunday."

"So far," observed Monkey Stallings, with a chuckle of satisfaction,
"there isn't any sign of those two hoboes turning up here again---which
pleases me a heap, let me tell you."

"Oh! no danger of them coming back again," Billy assured him.  "They
got the scare of their lives when you tooted that goose-call.  Long
before now that brace of tramps has struck the railroad ties, and are
making tracks for other regions where they don't have old castles
haunted by spooks."

The last picture was finally taken.  Alec seemed satisfied with what he
had done.

"I've got two rolls of film left," he explained, "which I'm going to
hold for an emergency.  You never know what may happen when you're
taking pictures.  Something is apt to come along that you would give a
heap to get, and if you're out of films you feel like kicking yourself."

"You've got a long head on your shoulders, Alec," commented Arthur.
"I guess you must believe in the old saying that 'an ounce of prevention
is better than a pound of cure.'"

"Also," added Billy drily, "that in times of plenty it's wise to lay
in a stock against the dry spell that's coming.  I've been there myself,
and ought to know what it means to go hungry just because you've been
careless.  That's one reason I always try to put in a spoonful of
coffee for every fellow, and then add one for the pot."

That was always the way with Billy; he seemed to view almost every
subject as inevitably connected with the one absorbing idea of supply
and demand.  By this time these good chums of his knew his weakness
so well that they generally let such allusions pass unnoticed.

"How would it do for us to root around a bit while we have the time?"
ventured Monkey Stallings, who liked to investigate better than anything
else, except in an old mansion where the dust of years had settled, and
there were uncanny things to be run across.

"If you mean," Hugh told him, "we might move around some, and look for
that place where we want to make our camp for the rest of our stay up
here, I'd say it was a good idea."

"Of course," supplemented Arthur, "we could move back to the castle
late this afternoon if the weather turned out bad, and a storm
threatened, which, according to all the known signs, isn't going to be
the case."

"Glad to hear you say that, old weather bureau prophet," laughed Alec;
for the scout who had just made that bold assertion had long been
looked up to as an authority on the subject of changes of the weather,
and could reel off a dozen reasons for the prediction he was making,
all founded on a good sensible basis.

Accordingly they all started forth, having deposited most of their
belongings in a good hiding-place where they would be perfectly safe.
Since there had been no attempt to clean up the grounds surrounding
the wonderful "castle" after its abandonment, Some ten years or so
before, of necessity they had gone back to their original, wild condition.
Nature always seeks to hide the cruel gashes made by the hands of
man, covering the wound with all manner of growth from trailing vines
to young saplings, brush and weeds.

Passing through a dense wilderness of this newer growth, the scouts
pushed on into the heavier woods.  Here they found things much more to
their way of looking at it.  Indeed, with the stately forest trees
rising up all around them, and shutting out that queer building on the
point of land overlooking the broad valley beyond, it seemed an ideal
spot for making a camp.

They were not long in deciding on where they would stay, and two of
the fellows, Alec and Monkey Stallings, were dispatched back to carry
their personal belongings to the new site.  Alec was anxious to get
to work developing some of the rolls of films he had taken, in the
expectation of making good any failures.

By ten o'clock everything had been gathered in the new camp, which was
situated not much more than a quarter of a mile away from the deserted
mansion.  The boys believed they could already call their mission a
success; and after Alec had been heard from in connection with his
photographic work, this would be set down as a certainty.

"Listen!" called out Monkey Stallings about this time, for he happened
to have remarkable hearing.  "Seemed to me that was some one talking
over yonder."

"Mebbe the tramps have come back after all," exclaimed Billy looking
startled.  "You know they always say a bad penny is sure to turn up
again."

"Better look for some good handy clubs, I say," observed Alec, pouncing
on just such a stout stick as he had in his mind's eye when speaking.

"Whoever it is coming," remarked Hugh, uneasily, "we'll soon know the
worst, for I can see them through the bushes there.  They know we're
here in the bargain, because they're making straight for this place."

The scout master had hardly finished saying this when two men dressed
in gray uniforms and carrying guns suddenly stepped out of the bushes,
one calling aloud:

"Hold up your hands there, every one of you, and don't try to run, or
it will be the worse for you.  We've tracked you up here, and you're
under arrest.  Steady now!"




CHAPTER VI

GUESTS AT THE CAMP FIRE


"Do what he says, fellows!" urged Hugh, sensibly, at the same time
elevating both hands above his head, in which ludicrous feat he was
speedily imitated by his four chums.

The two armed men continued to advance cautiously toward the scouts.
At the same time it could be seen that they appeared more or less
surprised on account of discovering that it was a parcel of fairly
well grown boys whom they were making prisoners.

"Is this a joke?" asked Alec Sands, with a tinge of a sneer in his
voice.  "If so I want to say it's in pretty bad taste, don't you know."

"You'll find it a serious kind of a joke, young fellow," snarled one
of the two men in uniform, who seemed to be huffed over something,
perhaps the scratches he had received in plenty where the brambles
had scraped his face.

"Perhaps you'll be kind enough to explain what we're being held up
this way for?" asked Hugh, as pleasantly as he could, for he realized
that these men must represent some sort of authority, and in all
probability were laboring under a misapprehension.

"Who are you all, anyway?" demanded the taller of the two men, and Hugh
saw that he had better address himself to this person, since he seemed
to be the more even-tempered of the pair.

"Our suits ought to tell you that," Alec managed to snap out, not
fancying the idea of being forced to keep his hands elevated in such
a fashion, just as though he might be a miserable criminal trying to
escape from the penitentiary.

"We are Boy Scouts," said Hugh, hastily, seeing the men frown at Alec's
impatient remark.  "We belong in Oakvale, and have come up here to
spend a couple of days camping out.  Besides that one of us has been
commissioned to take some pictures of an old deserted mansion not far
away from here, which his aunt in the city is expecting to buy, if
his report turns out favorable.  That's the whole story, I give you
my word of honor, sir."

The tall man looked straight into Hugh's face.  What he saw there
seemed to impress him very favorably, for the expression of distrust
quickly faded from his own countenance, and a friendly smile began
to take its place.

"I reckon we've been and made a mistake this time, Pete," he said,
turning to his companion.  "These young chaps don't look like they'd
have a hand in trying to get a crazy man free, after the law had shut
him up in an asylum!"

"What's that you say?" exclaimed Arthur, while Billy's eyes were
like small editions of saucers, in so far as being round was concerned.

"We belong at the State Asylum for the Criminal Insane," explained
the taller man, whom Hugh now understood must be a guard.  "There was
a notorious party shut up there, and he managed to escape by the aid
of his money and the help of some friends outside.  Men are searching
the whole country over for signs of him.  We got a clue that he might
be found up here in this region, and that he was being taken care
of in a camp, until such time as he could cross the line into Canada."

"Can we lower our hands now, friend?" asked Hugh, seeing that Billy
for one was getting very red in the face with the exertion of
stretching upward so long.

"I guess you don't none of you look very dangerous," he was told,
"so drop back as you please.  We can't take chances, you understand,
so we'll ask you to produce proofs that you're what you claim.  Then
if everything is O.K. p'raps now you might invite a couple of hungry
and tired guards to hang around a while until you rustled up a bit
of grub, and a cup of hot coffee which would go straight to the spot,
for we haven't had a thing to eat since last night."

"Oh! that's really too bad!" exclaimed Billy, immediately sympathizing
with any one who knew, the pangs of hunger.  "Sure, we'll invite you
to stay with us to lunch.  Luckily my policy of always providing a
little extra will come in handy, for we can fit you out with a pretty
fair meal."

Even the shorter guard grinned on hearing this.  He seemed to have
quite lost the feeling of suspicion he had at first entertained toward
Hugh and his chums.  In fact, he even stood his repeating rifle up
against the tree nearest him, and seemed bent on taking things easy.

Hugh was pleased because the adventure had after all turned out so
harmless.  He had been a little startled when the demand was first
made that they should surrender, and mention made of the startling
fact that they must consider themselves under arrest.

Every one busied himself in gathering wood, and making preparations
for building a fire, even though, under ordinary conditions the boys
might not have started in to cook for some time to come.  Billy,
however, seemed to consider it always in order to think of such an
important subject as "preserving life"; for that was what he was
pleased to call eating.  No one ever heard a groan or complaint from
Billy when the order was given to prepare a meal; if the occurrence
happened six times a day he would have shown up smiling and hungry on
each and every occasion.

The taller guard became more and more friendly as he watched these
preparations going on.  He also asked numerous questions concerning
Hugh and his chums.

"Now that I think of it," he remarked presently, "it strikes me I read
something about a batch of Oakvale scouts that helped the people over
in Lawrence when they had that big flood there.  Are you some of that
lot, boys?"

"Several of us were there, and had great times, I assure you," Hugh
modestly replied, nor did he offer to enter into any particulars of
what had happened in the imperiled town at the time of their visit,
though those boys from Oakvale had certainly earned the medals they
proudly wore for saving life at the risk of their own on that special
occasion.

"Why, yes," the shorter guard now remarked, "and when I went down
home last week in Chester they were talking about how some scouts
had helped fight the forest fires over Oakvale way.  Mebbe now you
chaps had a hand in that game, too?"

For answer Billy thrust out his left hand before the man's eyes.

"See that red scar on the back of my hand?" he asked.  "Well, I got
that up there fighting the fire on the mountain that was trying to
wipe out the home of Mrs. Heffner, a widow."

"Good for you, Billy!" exclaimed the taller guard, for by now they had
come to know the scouts by their several names, feeling quite at home
in the temporary camp.  "I'd like to wager that there must have been
some tall doings when _you_ got busy with the water pails.  I've been
on the same line myself, and know what it means to fight a forest
fire with the wind a-blowin' it right along, spite of all you can do
to stop it."

"About this crazy man you were speaking about," observed Alec, as
though a sudden suspicion might have struck him, "it doesn't happen
that his name could be Randall, Judge Anson Randall, does it?"

"Oh! what if it should turn out that way?" gasped Billy, as he
comprehended the nature of the idea that must have flashed through
the other's mind.

The tall guard, however, shook his head in the negative.

"That isn't his name at all," he told them.  "This man did something
terrible, and his money hired the best lawyers in the country to defend
him.  In the end he was called insane, and sent to the asylum.  Then
his folks tried every way they knew how to get him free.  At last a
scheme was hatched up so he could make a break for liberty.  Well,
their plans have succeeded.  He's escaped.  They're searching for
him all over the country up here.  But I reckon, because their plans
have been laid so carefully, all our efforts to catch the conspirators
will be in vain."

"Money talks!" said Alec, laconically.

"Well, it talks pretty loud in a case like this," the man added.

When the meal was ready they all sat around to enjoy it.  Billy in
particular seemed very much taken with the idea that they had company.

"We've known some queer happenings in our camping out experiences,
fellows," he told the others, as they started in to dispose of the
immense amount of food the generous fat scout had cooked.  "This is
the first time, however, we've had for guests a couple of gentlemen
guards from the State Asylum for the Criminal Insane.  I'm glad to
see you are enjoying my little snack, thrown together in so hasty
a manner."

"Well, me and my side partner," commented the taller guard, with a
wink at his companion, "wouldn't mind if a prisoner managed to break
away every day in the week if we could be sure of getting such a fine
treat as this, eh, Pete?"

Pete declared that he could truthfully echo that assertion, though
his mouth being so full at the time he could hardly more than mumble
his sentiments.

The two men did full justice to the meal, and then announced that, much
to their everlasting regret, they felt compelled to bid the friendly
scouts good-bye, though they would like nothing better than staying
over the night with them.

It was hardly full noon when they took their departure, waving a farewell
from the edge of the thick brush before plunging into the same.  They
had another clue that was worth following up, for those who were fortunate
enough to recapture the escaped prisoner would be in line to receive
some satisfying sort of reward, either in the shape of money, or a
betterment in their condition of employment at the asylum.

"Well, they're gone!" remarked Alec, as he busied himself with his
development tank, anxious to find out how his films were going to
turnout.

Billy heaved a sigh that seemed to come from the soles of his feet.

"To tell the honest truth," he admitted, "I ain't sorry a bit.  Those
fellows could give me points about how to stow stuff away, and then
not half try.  Why, they acted as if they were hollow clean down to
their shoes.  I guess they told the truth when they said they hadn't
had a bite of breakfast this morning."

"But, Billy," interposed Arthur, "I thought you loved to see people eat
heartily all the time?  We've always believed you were the most
hospitable fellow going."

"Huh! I used to think the same," grunted Billy, scratching his head,
"but then you know there's such a thing as piling on the agony.  Those
fellows weren't just hungry men---they were cannibals, regular human
graveyards, I should say, by the way the stuff disappeared down their
throats.  If they drop around again to-night I reckon our stock of
grub will be lowered so much we'll all of us have to go on half rations
the rest of the time we stay here---something I don't look forward
to with much joy."

"Don't worry, Billy," Hugh told him.  "They said they would be miles
away long before night set in.  The country is safe, and we're not
likely to starve."

Alec interrupted the conversation to call out exultantly:

"Oh! this first roll is coming along dandy, let me tell you!  It's
going to be the best thing I ever did; and my stars, but that lens
does cut fine!  It was a lucky day for me when Aunt Susan got track
of this old castle up here in the woods, for it's given me a regular
jewel of a camera outfit."

Every one felt pleased on hearing this, since it would save Alec the
trouble of snapping the pictures over again.

Billy was taking things easy after getting up the midday meal, as he
felt he had earned a rest.  At the same time the fat scout's mind was
busily employed.

"I was just thinking," he finally broke out with, "what a lot of queer
things have happened to us since we came up here.  I wonder what we'll
strike next.  We've rubbed up against raiding tramps, mewing owls,
ghosts in the night, and guards hunting for an escaped insane criminal.
Besides, there are still a few more hours left for a new batch of
exciting happenings.  I tell you, boys, this little side trip proposed
by Alec and engineered by Hugh bids fair to equal anything we've endured
in our whole checkered career."




CHAPTER VII

FACED BY A MYSTERY


To tell the truth, Hugh was thinking something along those same lines
himself, so that he felt in a mood to quite agree with the enthusiastic
Billy.

"Take it all in all," he remarked, reflectively, "we're one of the
luckiest lot of scouts that ever wandered down the pike.  Most fellows
experience a regular rut, and never run up against anything out of the
way.  But I have to shake myself very time I look back over our calendar,
for fear it's only a dream."

"We certainly have had more than our share of things happening to us,"
admitted Alec, proudly, "but the wheel of the mill will never run
again with the water that is past.  So I forget the things that are
gone, and keep looking hopefully forward to other glorious events that
lie waiting for us in the dim future."

"Hear! hear!" exclaimed Billy, clapping his hands, "Alec is getting
quite poetical these days."

"I only hope," continued the other, with a gleam of satisfaction in
his eyes, for one of Alec's weak spots was a love of flattery, "that
our latest venture will turn out just as successful as many others
have done before it."

"No reason that I can see why it shouldn't," spoke up Arthur Cameron.
"We've run across the lonely castle your aunt is negotiating for, and
it seems to fill the bill to a dot."

"Yes," remarked Monkey Stallings, anxious to have a hand in the
discussion, "and your pictures, you tell us, are turning out dandies
at that.  You ought to be as happy as a clam at high tide, as they
say, though I never asked one of the bivalves just why he felt that
way."

"Oh, I am!" declared Alec; "and I reckon the chances are three to one
Aunt Susan is going to enjoy this delightful quiet up here, where not
even the squawk of a crow, or the, crow of a squawking rooster can be
heard the livelong day.  Still, somehow I seem to feel a queer sense
of oppression bearing down on me.  I hope now it isn't a bad omen of
coming trouble, and that, after all, my rich aunt is doomed to lose
out in the deal for Castle Randall."

The others laughed at the idea.

"Why, it's a cinch for your side, Alec," said Hugh.

"The owner of this ancient and half-ruined pile of stone and make-believe
rocks," Arthur told the doubter, "couldn't find a purchaser in a coon's
age.  Who would ever want to come away up here to bury themselves from
civilization, and in such a silly old rookery as this?  Well, it was one
chance in a thousand that a nervous wreck like your aunt heard of it."

"Don't worry, Alec, you've got a snap, believe me," chuckled Stallings;
and then unable to longer resist a certain alluring limb which he had
been eying longingly for some little time, he bolted up the trunk of
the overspreading tree, to hang by his toes, and swing daringly to and
fro as some of them had seen a yellow-headed, green-bodied poll-parrot
do from his perch.

Alec continued his work, and from time to time announced that every
roll was indeed turning out superbly.  No one had ever seen him quite
so happy.  The possession of a lens that did better work than anything
he had ever known in all his experience was enough in itself to make
his boyish heart thrill with joy.  And then the singular character of
the film subjects added to the sense of satisfaction, for they were
sure to enhance the attractiveness of his collection, as well as
please Aunt Susan immensely.

It must have been about one o'clock when the boys received their first
rude shock.  Hugh had just been thinking of giving orders for another
walk in the direction of the deserted building about a quarter of a
mile away.  Alec had finished his work and had the well-developed
films hanging to dry, securely fastened to his stout cord with snap
clothes-pins, so there was no danger of any unfortunate catastrophe
happening to them before they were thoroughly dry.

"Listen, will you?" suddenly exclaimed Monkey Stallings, sitting bolt
upright, and raising one hand impressively.

"Oh, my stars!  what do you call that?" gurgled Billy.  From the
manner in which the color deserted his ruddy cheeks one might have
imagined he feared they were about to be attacked by a host of savage
pirates bent on plunder.

Alec and Arthur could also be seen to stare vacantly at the distance
while they strained their ears to listen.  As for Hugh himself he
found it hard to believe his senses, for the absolute quiet and dead
calm brooding all day long over that retired spot in the wilderness
had been rudely shattered by a most astonishing noise as of many hoarse
voices, making a jumble and roar of sound unlike anything save the
confusion of battle.

It rose, it died away again, and then once more swelled to an amazing
extent, after which it finally stopped as suddenly as it had begun.

Five scouts stared at each other.  Billy rubbed his eyes as though he
really began to believe he must be asleep, and passing through a vivid
dream bordering on the nightmare.

"Hugh! what can it be?" demanded Alec, a bit pale with sudden excitement,
for which in truth he could not be at all blamed under the circumstances.

For once the scout master seemed puzzled himself.  He shook his head
in a way that brought new consternation to the heart of Billy Worth.

"You've got me up against a hard proposition when you ask me that, Alec!"
was what Hugh declared.

"Then you can't even give a guess, can you, Hugh?" Billy besought him.

"We all heard the racket, that's sure," muttered Stallings, as though
he had possibly begun to suspect he might be a victim of some delusion,
and wished to make certain the others were in the same boat as himself.

"And it sounded just like a dozen, yes, three dozen men shouting like
anything," Arthur assured him.

"I wonder-----" began Billy, starting up eagerly.

"If you've got an idea hurry and tell us what it is!" urged the impatient
Alec.  "I'll be hanged if I can grapple anything, it's given me such
a bad shock."

"Go on, Billy!" added Arthur.

"Why," explained the fat scout, "you see, I was thinking that p'r'aps
those tramps we scared off had come back with a big bunch of their
kind, meaning to take possession of the castle.  Now, you needn't
all jump on me and say that's silly, because I happen to know those
hoboes often gather in regular armies about this time of year, heading
for the cities.  Hugh, it isn't such a bad idea, after all, is it?"

"Since none of us seem able to think of any other explanation," the
scout master told him, reassuringly, "it will have to stand until we
can strike on a better.  It seems to me the sooner we hike over that
way the quicker we'll learn the real facts."

"True enough, Hugh," assented Alec, readily, while the others showed
by their actions that they were perfectly willing to make the start.

Their preparations for leaving their camp were few and simple.  What
food they had left was thrust up in the crotch of a big tree, so that
it might not be carried off by any wandering wild animal, though they
had no reason to believe there was anything larger than a 'coon' or
a 'possum' around that region.  The blankets and a few other things
of value were also placed in safety, while Alec again tested the supports
of his "clothes line" on which those precious films were strung to dry.

"I hate to leave them," he told the others, mournfully, "but now that
they're wet and sticky they can't be packed away.  I almost wish I
hadn't been in such a hurry to develop them."

He stared at Billy as though almost tempted to beg that worthy to stay
behind and protect the films by his presence, which Billy absolutely
refused to do, rightly interpreting the look.

"Not on your life, Alec, much as I would like to oblige you!" asserted
the fat scout, positively.  "I want company when there's all sorts of
strange things happening around.  You don't catch me sticking to this
camp by my lonely.  Stay back yourself if somebody has just got to hold
the fort.  My duty lies in the front rank.  History tells that the
Worths were always found in the van when danger loomed up.  Sorry not
to oblige you, Alec, but it's simply impossible.  William Worth will
sink or swim with his comrades."

As Alec could not think of staying back when the rest were bent on
learning the secret of all that terrible clamor of human voices raised
in angry shouts and whoops, he took his place alongside Hugh, and
they all started forth.

"One thing sure, to begin with," remarked Hugh, after they had left
the camp behind them, "we're a unit in saying that racket came from
where we happen to know the old castle lies."

"Oh! that's an easy nut to crack!" declared Monkey Stallings.  "The
sounds came right down the wind, and any one can see it's blowing
softly straight from the haunted mansion."

"We might guess that the ghosts were having a hop all by themselves,"
ventured Billy, "only you know they say spirits never show themselves
in the daytime.  Anyway, those whoops were more like wild Injuns on
the warpath than just spooks."

"Well, as we don't happen to have any Indians left in this region
nowadays," added Hugh, drily, "we can put that explanation down as
impossible.  But we'll know more about it before three minutes more
have passed, because, unless I miss my guess, we can glimpse the castle
when we strike that rock yonder.  I remember taking a look back as
we came along, so as to impress distances and direction on my mind,
and could see the whole structure looming up."

"Whee! listen again, will you?" exclaimed Billy, aghast.

The strange noise had again broken out.  They could hear many husky
voices shouting in unison, and, besides, there were other odd sounds
such as might be made by a small army of desperate assailants beating
wildly against that stout door of the lonely castle.

No wonder the five boys stared at one another, with vacant looks on
their several faces.  It would have puzzled smarter people than they
pretended to be to analyze such a remarkable jumble of noises as their
ears now caught.

Hugh would not let them stop for a second.  Indeed, if anything, he
hurried them along faster than ever, as though fully determined to
have the mystery cleared up without further loss of time.  If Billy's
footsteps were inclined to make him linger behind his mates he bestirred
himself to assume a faster gait, for at such a critical moment the fat
scout did not wish to find himself left in the lurch.

The horrid din continued as they hurried forward.  If anything it grew
more and more maddening, causing the boys to shiver with mingled
impatience and alarm.

Now they were close on the rock mentioned by Hugh.  In another ten
seconds they would be able to at least see the walls of the grim castle
in the near distance.  Billy wondered whether, after all, they might
not discover that there was not the slightest sign of a living human
being in sight.  He was rapidly coming to believe there might be something
ghostly about these sounds.  Billy was just then in a fit condition
to believe anything, no matter how absurd, for his poor heart was
fluttering in his manly bosom just as you have doubtless felt the
tiny organ of a bird throb when you held the frightened thing in your
hand.

They all kept in a bunch, and thus arrived at the rock at the same
time.  Every scout came to a sudden stop.  Their eyes, dilated with
amazement, were turned toward the region where those sounds still
welled forth, shouts and blows and shrieks making a conglomeration
that was simply appalling.  So stunned were Hugh and his mates that
for a brief time their tongues clove to the roofs of their mouths.




CHAPTER VIII

AS IN THE DAYS OF CHIVALRY


"W-what's it all mean, Hugh?" Billy was gasping, as he stood there with
quaking knees, and just stared and stared.

Indeed, for the moment Hugh could not have answered him, he was himself
so busily engaged in looking.  There was good and sufficient reason for
the eyes of every one being glued on the remarkable sight taking place
before them, for surely such an amazing spectacle had never before
been witnessed in America, nor indeed for some hundreds of years even
in the old country.

The castle was no longer given over to the owls and bats and rats.  It
now seemed to be fairly swarming with moving figures, and such figures!
Hugh blinked, and took a second look before he could actually believe
his eyes.

Why, there were horses clad in all the panoply of the fourteenth century,
on the backs of which sat knights in shining armor, with long lances,
and great two-handed swords for their weapons, and waving plumes dangling
from their helmets.  Men with bare legs and all manner of weird apparel
were attacking the castle, using clubs, rocks, and queer arrangements
for casting missiles; some of them were climbing short scaling ladders
only to be rudely hurled down again by some of the valiant defenders
who manned the top of the walls.

The drawbridge had been raised, and the portcullis protected the door,
but the gallant assailants had apparently thrown a bridge hastily
constructed across the moat, and they were certainly as busy as a hive
of bees that had struck a mine of sugar.

It was a wonderful scene, and the five scouts could hardly be blamed
for thinking they must be dreaming, everything was so unreal, so like
a page torn from history in the times of the Crusaders.

Perhaps one or more of them began to believe that a host of spirits
belonging to ancient worthies, long since dead, while passing by had
recognized in the make-believe castle such a wonderful copy of something
they had known in life that they were tempted to stop and play their
parts again with all this gusto and confusion.

If this were the case, however, Hugh quickly disillusioned the rest of
the group.  His quick eye had found an explanation for all this
remarkable happening.

"Well, I declare, who would ever have believed it?" they heard him
saying, for again the riot was beginning to die out, men were brushing
themselves off, while a few others, less fortunate than their companions,
were being pulled out of the moat surrounding the castle, which evidently
held some water, for they appeared to be dripping wet, though taking
it all in good part.

"What have you guessed, Hugh?" demanded Arthur, knowing from the
manner of the scout master that he had apparently solved the mystery.

Hugh was laughing now.  The strained look had passed from his young
face.  It seemed to him like a jump from the sublime to the ridiculous.

"If you fellows will look over to one side to where that man was turning
the handle of some sort of box just as if he might be an organ grinder,
you'll guess what it all means," Hugh told them, pointing as he spoke.

Cries of wonder and comprehension immediately arose from Alec and
Arthur, though even then Billy and Stallings did not seem to fully
grasp the facts.

"Motion-picture actors at work!" exclaimed Alec.

"Oh! did you ever hear of such a thing?" gurgled Billy, at the same
time beginning to lose the haunted look on his face.

"Sure thing!" added Arthur, grinning now.  "That chap is the camera
man---what is it they call it, a cinematoscope or something that way.
He's been grinding like mad while all that battle on the walls was
taking place.  And I can see him laughing from here, as if that last
scrap pleased him a whole lot."

"Well, if that don't beat everything!" said Monkey Stallings, in
mingled awe and delight.  "To think of a company finding out about
that queer old imitation castle, and coming all the way up here so as
to stage one of their Shakespeare plays around it!"

"And look at all the actors they've gone and fetched along with them,
will you?" Billy went on to say.  "Why, there must be scores of men
and women there, all dressed in fancy costumes.  Gee! it must cost
_rafts_ of money to stage just one of those dramas."

"Oh!" said Hugh; "expense doesn't seem to enter into their calculations
when they think they've got something that will go.  A thousand people
have been used in, one play, I've read, and as much as two hundred
thousand dollars spent on it!"

"Say, here's our same old luck come along again, fellows!" declared
Arthur, as though it gave him a tremendous amount of satisfaction
to realize it.  "I've always had a sort of hankering after a chance
to learn just how these queer people managed when staging one of their
plays, and as sure as you live we're in a fair way to find out now."

"Was there ever anything so strange as our being up here just at the
time they came to play their game?" demanded Monkey Stallings.  "Why,
it begins to look as if they must have engaged the old castle especially
to cast their play here, and make it seem the real stuff, don't you
think so, Hugh?"

"That's not so very remarkable, after all," ventured Hugh, as all
of them continued to stare at the many moving figures, apparently
resting for the next stage in the exciting drama that was being reeled
off.  "I understand that all those big companies have spies out
everywhere about the country."

"Spies!" echoed Billy; "and what for, Hugh, when we're not at war with
anybody?"

"There's a tremendous amount of competition afloat between the numerous
companies," explained the other.  "They are looking for all sorts of
queer settings for their plays.  Houses have to be burned down,
bridges blown up, railroad trains ditched, and all manner of stunts
pulled off to satisfy the public greed for thrilling spectacles."

Alec gave a plain, unmistakable groan.

"That's it," he said disconsolately, "it's going to spell my finish.
I knew that I didn't have that heavy feeling for nothing.  There was
something in the air that told me my fine dreams were going to be
wrecked, sooner or later.  Chances are now this big company has gone
and stepped in to buy the old castle for a song, and in the course
of their reproduction of history they expect to blow the same up,
or at least set fire to that part made of wood.  It's all off, boys!"

"But you've got your pictures to show for it, Alec," Hugh told him,
consolingly, "and your aunt wouldn't think of taking back your camera
after you've done so well with it.  She can see that it isn't your
fault, no matter what happens to the old building now."

Alec gave a cry of triumph.

"Say, that's right, Hugh, and thank you for reminding me I'm carrying
that same camera at this very minute.  What's to hinder me snapping off
a few pictures on my own account of what's going on over there?  What
do you say to that, Hugh?"

"I should say you'd be foolish not to take the chance," returned the
scout leader.

It was surprising to see how Alec forgot his keen disappointment as
he commenced to focus his instrument upon the easily seen building,
with all those strange costumed figures about the walls.

"The sun is just right for a cracker-jack snap-shot from here," he
remarked, as he proceeded to press the bulb, and then carefully change
the exposure so that he might not inadvertently take two pictures
on the same portion of film; for Alec was exceedingly systematic in
most things he did, which was one secret for his wonderful success
at photography, a profession that allows no haphazard habits.

"There, I reckon they're staging another picture over yonder, boys!"
cried Arthur, as a new bustle was noticed amidst the group of players.
"Two of the men appear to have been knocked out in that attack, for
there's a chap who looks like he might be a doctor attending to them
under that tree.  I wonder if they'd care to let me lend a hand at
that part of the game?  I'm sure I can be of help."

Arthur was never happier than when plying his favorite vocation of
amateur surgeon.  He had really done some fine work along those lines,
and received the approbation of those who were well up in medical
practice.

"Whee, if all that scrapping was half-way real!" burst out the admiring
Billy; "the only thing I wonder at is how any of those fellows manage
to come out of the fight with whole heads or limbs.  Some of them were
sent crashing down when that short ladder was hurled back by the
defenders on the walls.  It looked pretty real stuff from here."

"It is pretty near the genuine thing." said Hugh.  "I've often wondered
whether they faked those wonderful affairs, but after, what I've seen
this day I'm going to believe they're as close to the original as can
be.  There, you see how the fat man beside the operator is waving
his arms.  He's got a megaphone, too, and as the scene goes along
he bawls through that to tell them to keep on, or change the way
they're doing things."

Alec got ready to take another snap-shot when the battle was well on.
He was as excited as Hugh had ever seen him, and the other took
occasion to warn the photographer to be careful.

"Get a grip on yourself, Alec," he said.  "Hold yourself steady, or
else you'll be making some fearful blunder, and spoiling the best
chance you ever had to get a prize picture.  Now they are starting
in again, you see!"

Every one of the five scouts was straining his eyesight to the extreme
limit in the, endeavor not to lose the slightest incident.  Never
before had such a glorious opportunity come to any of their kind to
actually watch how those astonishing scenes of olden times were taken
by the motion-picture players; and they did not want to miss any part
of it.

Again did the great noise break forth as the valiant assailants commenced
their new attack upon the apparently impregnable walls of the ancient
castle, so gallantly defended by the occupants.

This small army of players had descended on the region like a flood
of seventeen-year locusts.  An hour or two before and there had apparently
not been a living thing in the neighborhood of the mansion, and now
it was the centre of a swarming horde of earnest workers, each trying
to earn his salary as best he knew how, both by shouting, and also
fighting in yeoman style.

"Oh! why can't we get closer than this, Hugh?" begged Alec, after
he had taken another snap at the animated spectacle that would later
on thrill many a boyish heart in the way of a picture, and also cause
a feeling of envy to arise because a cruel fate had prevented them
from participating in the wonderful adventure.

"Nothing to hinder that I can see," he was told.  "Fact is, I was going
to suggest that same thing myself.  So let's get a move on, fellows."

Eagerly they kept pace with Hugh as he started to run toward the castle.
It would be a shame not to take full advantage of the golden opportunity
offered them to get in close touch with these motion-picture actors
who, unaware of the fact that they had a small and select audience
in the way of Boy Scouts, were each and every one working like troopers
to fulfill their difficult duties.

Alec kept close "tabs" on what was going on ahead presently, possibly
fearing that the excited, fat manager, who was dancing up and down,
mopping his forehead with a red bandanna with one hand, and waving
the megaphone with the other when not shouting through the same, might
call the scene off, the boy stopped short, focussed again on the amazing
picture, and got another snap-shot at closer range.

In this fashion the runners managed to come close up before there
was a sudden cessation to all the tumult of hideous war, and the actors,
laughing and evidently enjoying it to the utmost, began to crowd around
the stage director as if to learn whether the scene had met with his
approval.




CHAPTER IX

WITH THE MOTION-PICTURE PEOPLE


"Where did you boys spring from, I'd like to know?"

It was the perspiring stage manager who asked this question when Hugh
and the other four scouts came hurrying up to where he was sitting on
a rock, fanning himself with his hat, while the dozens of knights,
squires and bowmen were puffing cigarettes, and apparently resting up
for the next exciting scene in the wonderfully realistic drama of
olden times.

"Well, you see, sir, we happen to belong to a scout troop over in
Oakvale," explained Hugh.  "We came up here to spend the weekend,
and transact some business at the same time.  This chap here, Alec
Sands, has a peculiar old aunt in the city who is anxious to buy just
such a quiet retreat as this place, where she wouldn't hear a sound,
for she's got a case of nerves, you see.  And one of our objects was
to take some pictures of the castle, as well as spy around a bit."

The red-faced stage-director laughed even as he kept on mopping his
forehead.  Evidently it mattered little to him that the air was quite
chilly, for his duties kept him so much on the jump he was sweltering
from the perspiration of hard, honest labor.

"Say you so, my young friend?" he exclaimed.  "Well, if we leave any
part of the old ruin intact when we're through with this series of
startling pictures the old lady can doubtless buy it at a small
figure."

"Does that mean you'll wreck a big structure like this, sir, just to
get a picture of it being blown up?" asked Alec, dismayed.

"Oh, that doesn't cut any figure in the bill!" he was told flippantly.
"The public demands the best there is, and money must flow like water
in order to keep up with our rivals.  We're going to give them something
novel this time, you see."

"How, sir?" Monkey Stallings found the courage to ask, his curiosity
getting the better of his modesty.

"This new play isn't really a play at all," said the stout man, with
a touch of pride in his voice.  "It's a stunt of my own we're pulling
off to-day.  You see, the public sometimes expresses a desire to learn
just how these magnificent pictures are done, and we expect to show
them the whole thing from beginning to end.  They'll see my company
starting out in a string of motor cars for this place; watch them
getting rigged out in their spic-and-span suits of mail, and old-time
stuff; feast their eyes on just such wonderful feats as you have seen
pulled off beside these massive walls; and step by step, be taken
into our confidence as we progress, until finally the amazing climax
arrives.  Right now you can hear the machine clicking away, as the
operator takes a crack at the players resting between their acts.
Perhaps it may please you chaps to know that you'll be seen in the
finished production along with the rest of the troupe."

Billy seemed quite awed at the idea.  He was observed to slyly pull
down his vest, and straighten himself up as though on dress parade.
If countless thousands of people were going to gaze upon his person
throughout the whole length and breadth of the land, Billy wanted
to do his family justice, and not disgrace his bringing up.

Plainly, the stage director seemed to be considerably interested in
the scouts.  Possibly he may have had a boy or two of his own in his
metropolitan home who also wore the khaki, and consequently any fellow
who sported such a uniform was of some value in his eyes.  Then again,
in his hard labors, the coming of Hugh and his four comrades may have
seemed like a breath of fresh air, something to temporarily distract
him from the routine of his trying business.

At any rate, he seemed disposed to continue the conversation while his
people were resting, and making ready for the next act in the drama of
publicity.

"Although all this seems very wonderful to you boys," he went on to
remark, lighting a cigarette as he spoke, at which he took several
puffs and then nervously threw it away again, "it represents only one
little event in the bustling activities of my force here, as any
regular member of it could tell you."

"I suppose you must have been around some, sir?" ventured Monkey
Stallings, at which the red-faced manager looked queerly at him and
then chuckled.

"Well, it's a hustling age, you know," he told them.  "I've been at
this business over four years now, and so far it hasn't quite reduced
me to a skeleton in spite of the fierce work.  I've taken the leading
members of my famous players across the desert in Egypt to the pyramids,
explored Spain and the heart of India, traveled across Japan, gone
into China, camped in Central American jungles, wandered into the
heart of Africa hunting big game, toured away up in Alaska as well
as traveled all through the Wild West, and in Mexico among the fighting
that's always going on down there.  And I've got a few more stunts
mapped out that will dwarf everything else that's ever been undertaken.
Oh! this is only a little picnic for a motion-picture stage director."

He may have been stretching the truth more or less, but then Hugh saw
no reason to disbelieve what he said.  The boy realized that in these
modern days those who would succeed in the midst of fierce competition
must have something very unusual to offer the fickle public in the way
of adventure and novel effects.  Why, the mere fact of this manager
learning about the deserted castle in the lonesome valley, and
fetching such an army of players all the way up there to impersonate
the genuine characters of olden days, was proof enough that what he
had just been saying might be considered in the line of reason.  At
all events, there was no ground on which to doubt him.

Billy was casting frequent nervous glances over toward the spot where
the operator was still grinding lustily away, seeking to get a good
picture of the actors in one of their off-periods, when they were
taking things easy after a recent "engagement."

When, by accident, Monkey Stallings chanced to step in the way, Billy
hastily moved his position.  When a Worth was being immortalized in
this fashion far be it for a worthy scion of the race to allow a mere
Stallings to crowd him out.  When, presently, the grinding ceased,
with the operator hurrying across to report his success to the bustling
stage director, Billy grinned in conscious triumph, for he felt convinced
that he stood out prominently in that picture, so that any one who saw
it must notice what a handsome chap one of the Boy Scouts appeared to
be on the screen, at least.

The man who was running all this wonderfully complicated affair looked
just like a goodnatured, red-faced bank cashier, but Hugh realized that
he must have an amazing capacity for detail work, as well as a
remarkable faculty for organization.

Now and then he would refer to a sheaf of papers he carried around
with him, fastened together with a little arrangement that allowed
of their being rapidly turned over from time to time.  Doubtless this
was his plan of campaign.  Hugh would have given something for the
privilege of examining the same, but lacked the assurance to ask such
a favor of one who was an utter stranger to him, and moreover could
not afford to spend much time with a pack of mere boys.

It could be seen that the players expected to be soon called around the
managing director for instructions connected with motion pictures were
taken.  So Hugh pulled at the sleeves of Monkey Stallings, to intimate
that they had better fall back.

Arthur had already left them.  Hugh hardly needed to take a look around
to understand what it was that had drawn the other.  Yes, he was over
there where the man in a business suit seemed to be bathing the limb
of a super who had suffered more or less severely when the ladder on
which he was mounted had been roughly dislodged from the walls,
throwing all upon it to the ground beneath.

If Arthur were given half a chance he would soon be busily engaged
assisting the doctor wrap some linen bandages about that bruised limb.
By his eager remarks he would also arouse considerable interest on
the part of the company's physician, who probably always accompanied
the troupe wherever they traveled, as his services were in frequent
demand.  Indeed, sometimes he became a very busy man.

"I wonder," Billy was saying, becoming more and more audacious, it
seemed, on the principle that give one an inch and he will want an
ell---"I wonder now if he'd listen to me if I asked him to let us have
a chance to get in the next picture?"

Monkey Stallings laughed harshly at hearing that.

"Well, you are a greeny, Billy, I must say," he declared.  "Stop and
think for a minute, will you, how silly it would look to see a bunch
of Boy Scouts dressed in khaki clothes helping those old-time yeomen
tackle the walls of that ancient castle.  Why, we'd queer the whole
business, that's what!"

"Yes, but didn't you hear him say we'd appear in that last scene?"
disputed the eager Billy, loth to give up his ambitious plan to have a
leading place in the exposition showing how this famous group of
motion-picture players did their perilous work.

"Sure he did," retorted the other, with a shrug of his shoulders as
if he pitied Billy's ignorance, "but then you must remember that was
intended to show the players resting up between acts, and not at their
work.  There's a whole lot of difference between the two jobs, let
me tell you."

Billy made no reply, but it could be seen that he looked greatly
disappointed as he watched the myriad of actors begin to get in
position for the opening of the next scene.  This might possibly
represent the triumphant entry of the assailants into the castle of
the enemy, which, in turn, would lead up to the rescue of the lovely
heroine just when the villainous knight was about to hurl her into
the blazing tower.

The chattering began to die away as the harsh voice of the stage
director was heard through his megaphone, giving directions as to how
this or that group should carry out their parts.  Hugh wondered how
many turns it would take before that exacting manager felt like calling
it a satisfactory picture.  Perhaps they might be forced to repeat
the scene many times, simply because some clumsy fellow did something
to injure its value.

Alec was busily manipulating his camera, and Hugh chuckled when he
found that the other was taking in the entire scene, showing the operator
with his instrument, as well as the scouts gathered near by.  Billy,
too, had made the same discovery, for he was smiling as sweetly as he
knew how, and had again assumed that martial attitude which he seemed
to consider made him such a striking figure.

Evidently this little expedition was bound to be fruitful with results,
and on their return home those who were along would have something
to show for their labors.  Even if that eccentric relative of Alec's
lost the chance to obtain a quiet retreat "far from the madding crowd,"
as Billy had once described it, their week-end outing promised to
be well worth the effort it cost them individually and collectively.

They watched everything that was being done.  It was astonishing to
see what an amount of stuff the players had fetched along from the
city, in order to carry out the battle scene true to the original,
as they understood it.  Why, even the rude bridge that had been thrown
across the moat had been fashioned beforehand, and was carried with
them in sections, like one of those ready-built houses Hugh remembered
seeing advertised, that "any boy could put together."

The stage director was fuming, and saying a lot of hard things, as
though some of the stupid acts of the army of _supers_ nearly drove
him distracted.  By degrees he managed to whip his forces into the
shape he wanted before he gave the warning signal that the fun was
about to commence.

"Whee!" Billy was saying half to himself as he stared at the bustling
scene, "but wouldn't it be great if only we'd been asked to put on
some suits like those fellows are wearing, and have a chance to climb
up the ladders?  I bet you now we'd show them how to break through,
no matter what the men on the walls tried to put on us.  But shucks!
that'd be too big luck; and besides, it could hardly be fair for
us boys to steal the thunder of those hard-working actors.  There,
he's going to give the signal for the mimic war to begin. Everybody
take a big breath and sail in!  Now, go it, you terriers; the battle's
on again!"




CHAPTER X

THE ASSAULT ON THE "CASTLE."


"Yes, there goes the signal!" burst from the excited Alec, as they saw
the manager suddenly raise his hand, and fire a revolver three times
in quick succession.

Immediately everybody seemed to get busy at once.  Most of the
battle-scarred veterans, who knew their business so well, started in
just about where the last stirring scene had left off.  Possibly those
who had been "killed" in the former desperate assault had found time
to come mysteriously to life again, leaving a dummy in their stead to
be ruthlessly trampled on, now assumed new places in the ranks, to make
the assailants and defenders look more like a veritable "host."

The scouts held their breath in very awe.  What they were looking at
was indeed quite enough to make any one do that.  Certainly no such
remarkable scene had ever before been "set" since those actual days
when Crusaders and Saracens met in mortal combat on the plains of the
Holy Land, and knights went forth to battle in joust and tournament
wearing a fair lady's glove on their helmet as a talisman for luck.

Of course Hugh, as well as most of his young companions, had read
some of the romantic works of Sir Walter Scott, and were familiar
with his vivid descriptions of just such warlike pictures as they
now saw delighted Hugh, indeed, was of the opinion that it might be
one of these that the famous players of the motion picture world were
now acting, and the name of "Ivanhoe" was uppermost in his mind as
he watched the progress of the furious battle.

There were women folks in the castle, too, for occasionally they could
be seen frantically spurring their defenders on to renewed exertions.
Others may have been playing the part of prisoners, for the boys
discovered a white handkerchief waving from a window in one of the
turrets, as though to encourage the assailants in their work.  Perhaps
this was Rebecca in her cell, Hugh thought.

All of this just about suited the imagination of red-blooded boys as
proper and right.  It had been virtually going on ever since the world
began, and would in all probability endure so long as men lived on
this planet.

Now and then, when one of the scouts discovered something that
particularly interested him, and to which he wished to draw the
attention of his mates, he found it necessary to fairly bawl the fact,
so as to be heard above the wild clamor.

As a rule, this appertained to Monkey Stallings and Billy.  Hugh was
wrapped up in observing all that went on, and it required his undivided
attention, just as on the occasion of his visiting a big circus where
wonderful events were taking place in three rings at the same time.

Arthur Cameron, on his part, was mentally figuring on how much surgical
attention some of these doughty warriors would need after this amazing
fracas; and when Arthur had his mind set upon that entrancing subject
he might be considered blind to all ordinary matters.

As for Alec, his one idea was to snap off an occasional picture that
would show the astonishing thing he and his lucky comrades had run
across when the motion-picture players came to make use of the imitation
castle on the peak.  The only trouble with Alec was a dreadful fear
that his supply of film might run out, and then he stood a chance of
missing what was likely to prove the best part of the whole proceedings.

Already he had reached Number Ten on his last roll, with but two more
to wind up.  Oh, what would he not have given for a couple more rolls
of a dozen exposures each; just then they would have been worth their
weight in silver to the ambitious photographer.

Vague hopes had been playing at leap-tag in the mind of the scout
picture-taker.  He wondered if there might not be some way in which
they could succeed in influencing that hopping stage manager to promise
to sell them a duplicate set of the pictures when they were ready
for showing to the public.  Alec knew that they were rented out, and
sometimes sold outright.  If Hugh now, with his persuasive tongue,
could only exact such a promise from the gentleman in charge, would
it not be a splendid achievement to incidentally have the picture
included in the programme to be run at the town hall for some local
benefit; and then hear the shouts from the boys of Oakvale when they
discovered familiar uniforms and faces amidst the actors at rest?

From various remarks which the boys had heard shouted by the stage
directors in giving his last directions they understood that this
attack was calculated to carry the fort.  Already the men who wielded
that heavy battering ram made from a convenient log, seemed to be
smashing in the stout oaken front door, never built to resist such
a desperate assault.  It quivered with each blow.

The director was shouting a medley of orders through that wonderful
megaphone of his.  He seemed to be able to see everything that took
place.  Hugh compared him to what he had once read about the eminent
conductor of orchestra and musical festivals, Theodore Thomas, who
when more than a hundred musicians were practicing under his direction,
with a fearful outburst of sound and melody, would suddenly stop the
proceedings, and scold a certain player whose instrument had "flatted,"
or come in just an ace behind the regular time.

And every member of that vast company was keeping a wary eye on the
director all the time seeming to be working like mad.  They were waiting
to catch the signal that was to inaugurate the final scene, where
those on the walls were to weaken, allowing one after another of the
ascending men on the ladders to crawl over the parapet.

The door was really giving way now under the bombardment brought to
bear upon it.  Indeed, not to be premature those who wielded the
battering ram had to slacken their efforts more or less, though
pretending to work as furiously as heretofore.

One thing alone seemed lacking, according to the mind of Billy, to make
the battle seem the real thing.  There were no cannon shots, and even
the rattle of muskets and small arms appeared lacking.

Later on, when by chance in a carping, critical mood he mentioned
this fact, he was greeted by a roar of derision from Monkey Stallings
and Alec, who told him to brush up a little on history.  He must remember
that in those ancient days gunpowder had not been invented, and that
consequently all missiles that passed through the air had to be hurled
by machines fashioned after the style of the familiar rubber sling
so well known to all boys.

"It's coming soon now, fellows!" shouted the Stallings boy, whose
quick eye no doubt noted certain preparations for the final scene,
such as a gathering of the assailants on the ladders, now no longer
being overthrown, and also clinging to such projections of the stone
walls near the escarpment as they could find.

Alec held his hand.

"Only one more picture!" he was groaning, disconsolately, at the same
time determined that it should be the climax of the whole affair, when
the castle walls were actually carried by the energetic horde pushing
against them.

More wildly than ever waved those frantic appeals for "help" from
the narrow window slits in the tower room.  The "fair lady" was apparently
doing everything in her power to encourage her knight and his followers
to renewed efforts in her behalf.

Of course, it was a foregone conclusion that the gallants who were
doing the assaulting would be victorious in the end.  Motion-picture
patrons differ from those who attend the grand opera, since they will
not stand to have their drama turn out disagreeably.  Right must always
triumph over might, regardless of how it actually happens in real life;
and the villainous knight was sure to be punished as soon as the heroic
leader of the attacking party could force an entrance to the castle,
and chase after him to the tower room.

Hugh drew a long breath.

Just as the sagacious Monkey had declared at the top of his voice, the
finish was close at hand now.  At any second Hugh expected to hear the
volley of shots from the stage director's weapon sounding high above
the clamor.  Indeed, much of the racket had died down, showing that
the actors themselves were looking for it, and did not want to do
anything to smother the welcome sound that would mean their release
from further toil and turmoil, for the moment, at least.

All this while the operator was grinding away assiduously.  He knew
his duty was to get down everything that happened regardless of what
his judgment might be.  If certain sections of the film proved
objectionable from any cause it would be an easy matter to eliminate
that part; whereas nothing new could be supplied without going over
the whole scene again at tremendous cost of energy.

It was certainly an education for Hugh.  He had never dreamed that such
a splendid chance would come his way, allowing him to learn just how
motion pictures were made.  Truly, the wonderful good luck that had
been the portion of himself and comrades for so long a period seemed
to still follow their footsteps, as one of the boys had only recently
declared.

And just then the shrill voice of Monkey Stallings rang out again, this
time with a note of genuine alarm pervading its tones.

"Look, oh, look!" was what he shrieked, excitedly; "that wall is sure
going to collapse right down on those men!  That's real, not
make-believe!  Oh, Hugh, can't something be done to warn the poor
fel---there, it's coming now!"

And right through it all the imperturbable operator kept grinding away.
It was a part of his business to get everything down, real or imitation;
and even an accident that imperiled human life might make good "stuff."




CHAPTER XI

IMITATION AND REALITY


Perhaps it was almost mechanically that Alec pressed the bulb of his
camera at just the very second when that wall was toppling over.  He
had a faint recollection afterwards of doing so, though only filled
with horror at the moment itself.

There was a sudden cessation to all the clamor as the accident happened.
Indeed, the three quick reports from the director's revolver hardly
seemed needed to bring a halt to the proceedings.  As the door was
about burst in, anyway, and some of the men could not longer be restrained
from clambering over the top of the walls, it would answer just as
well as though things had proceeded in their regular routine.

Immediately afterwards a new kind of noise burst forth.  Women shrieked,
and men shouted.  There were also cries of pain intermingled with
the rest, Hugh noticed.

Before the scout master could even give an order he missed one of his
companions.  Of course, this was Arthur Cameron.  The sight of that
mass of rock toppling over upon several of the motion-picture actors,
and carrying others down amidst a perfect jumble of heaped up stones,
acted on Arthur as a red flag does upon the angry bull in the ring.

Nothing could have kept him back, for his ears would have been deaf
even to an order from the leader, whom he delighted to obey.  Arthur's
surgical instincts were aroused, and he saw the path of duty before
him.  And Arthur never shirked his duty.

Hugh waited not upon the order of his going, but immediately chased
after the other.  Monkey Stallings was not far behind him, with Billy
tagging along of necessity.  As for Alec, he only waited to gather
up his beloved camera, even neglecting to turn the last exposure down
as a completed roll.

In fact everyone seemed to be trying to converge upon the spot where
the wall had collapsed.  The manager was pushing his way through the
crowd, waving his megaphone, and looking somewhat alarmed, for he
felt dismayed at the idea of having so many of his supers being injured
more or less seriously.  It would mean not only pain and suffering
for the poor fellows but a pretty heavy bill of damages to pay by the
company.

And yet, such is the force of education which becomes second nature
with men, that even in the midst of all this confusion the manager
could think to bawl out to the operator not to neglect to get all this
in his reel, as it was going to show what actual perils the actors
ran in making their pictures.

Another queer thing happened that must be set down.  Hugh actually
forgot he was only a boy, and had been given no authority over these
men.  He saw that the first to arrive on the scene acted as though
ignorant of the best way to go about rescuing the poor chaps who were
partly buried under all that wreckage of the fallen wall.

So what did he do but begin to order them about as though they were
slaves.  He told a couple of them off to lift a heavy stone from the
lower limbs of a man who seemed to be unconscious, and then there
came Arthur actually directing them how to raise the wounded super
and carry him to where he could be laid under the nearest tree.

Stranger still the men did just as they were bidden.  In moments like
this the stronger mind dominates the situation, regardless of age or
stature.  Those supers were in the habit of taking orders, and never
stopped to question when told to follow out a line of work, especially
when the command came in a tone of authority.

That was the remarkable picture that met the eye of the stage manager
when he presently reached the scene.  Hugh seemed to be telling the
others what to do as if all his life he had been accustomed to the
position of chief.  No wonder the experienced manager stared at the
boy who wore the faded suit of khaki, and even allowed a faint smile
to wreathe his lips; for did he not have a beloved lad like that at
home, and in his heart he felt that perhaps some day, in a time of
desperate necessity, his son might likewise rise to an occasion as
this young chap was doing.

There was no lack of eager workers, and they seemed to fall in with
whatever Hugh told them to do.  He pointed this way and that as he
directed them to dig in the mass of debris for any unfortunate who
might be buried quite out of sight.  And not once did it enter into
the head of the earnest lad that the machine close by was clicking
away merrily through it all, showing everything that was being done
in the shadow of a real tragedy.  Here was realism for fair!

Already three poor chaps had been either carried off or assisted.
There were two of them grunting as though quite badly injured.  Arthur,
now joined by the regular doctor who accompanied the troupe of actors
on their many lengthy trips, was busily engaged, endeavoring to ascertain
the extent of the damages.  A dozen of the awed actors and actresses
surrounded the impromptu field hospital, and upon every face could
be seen only the deepest sympathy.

Still, after the worst was known and the last of the injured taken
care of, no doubt the task of completing the picture would go on,
just as if nothing out of the ordinary had happened.  These roving
players become so accustomed to accepting risks in the pursuit of
their calling that a little thing like this cannot be allowed to
interfere with the main object of their business for any great
length of time.

Other supers would be called upon to take the places of those injured,
if there was any necessity for reenforcements, and the work of completing
the drama would proceed apace.

By degrees the mass of fallen material was pulled aside, many hands
making light work.  Half a dozen of the agile players had managed to
save themselves, receiving only slight skin abrasions which would
hardly keep them from earning their salaries.

There were just four who had been carried or helped to the "hospital"
under the tree near by in the grounds of the castle.  It was when
the pleasing fact had been communicated by one of the workers that
the last victim of the accident was found, with no fatalities to account
for, that the stage manager came up to Hugh with outstretched hand.

He had his megaphone slung over his back as a sportsman might his
fowling-piece.  With that everlasting red bandanna he was mopping his
forehead again, and this time it may have been as much anxiety as
action that started the perspiration streaming down his rosy face.

"I want to thank you from my heart, son," he told the pleased scout
master, as he gripped his hand in a warm clutch.  "You have proved
yourself a jewel in this emergency.  If this is one of the things
scouts learn, I'm glad my boy has taken up the subject. I'm proud
of you all.  I don't see, how we could have done things half as well
if you hadn't been on the ground to assist, yes, to take the lead.
Once more, I thank you!"

He glanced to where Arthur, with his coat thrown off, was working
over one of the victims of the near-tragedy.  The sight seemed to
affect the stage manager, for he nodded his head violently, and Hugh
believed he could see a moisture in his eyes just then.

"I had another boy some years back, I want to tell you," he said,
softly.  "He was drowned while swimming in the river.  His companions
succeeded in getting Tad out, but they were utterly ignorant as to
how to go to work to restore him to consciousness---and so my boy
died.  I believe before Heaven that if they had been raised in the
knowledge of the things you Boy Scouts learn in these days, my poor
wife and I need not have suffered such a cruel loss.  When I learned
something about the education of a scout, I made up my mind that since
I had still one son left to me there would never be a repetition of
that calamity.  He is now a patrol leader in his troop in Brooklyn,
and can swim like a duck.  Come, let's go over and see what the worst
is going to be."

Hugh gladly accompanied the genial stage manager.  His heart burned
within him, not with silly pride, but sincere gratification, on account
of what he had just heard.  The boy's mind was so wrapped up in the
glorious possibilities that an aspiring scout ever has at his finger-tips
that commendation like this always pleased him.  It was Hugh's ambition
to have the Oakvale Troop embrace every lad of suitable age in and
around his home town.  He would not have a single one refused an
opportunity to enjoy those privileges and advantages which membership
with the scouts assures.

So they joined the circle around the temporary "hospital."  The doctor
had not allowed the anxious crowd to press in too closely, for he
understood the value of plenty of fresh air and working room when
engaged in cases of this kind.  Besides, most of the picture players
knew from former experiences what they must do, and were only eager to
be of any possible help.

Even the women, clad in their strange gowns of a bygone age, and wearing
astonishing head-dresses and shoes, showed remarkable courage.  Their
nerves had been steeled by long association with perils of various
types, so that they manifested none of the weaknesses people expect
to find in connection with the gentler sex.  One of the leading actresses
was assisting in washing quite an ugly wound that a poor fellow had
received in his arm.  He seemed to be bearing his suffering like a
hero, and acted as though he rather enjoyed having one of the heroines
play the part of nurse to a humble understrapper.

Hugh allowed his eyes to fall with pardonable pride upon his chum,
Arthur, for he saw that, as usual, the ambitious amateur surgeon was
doing fine work, of which no one need be ashamed.

And all of this remarkable happening was being faithfully recorded
upon the rapidly shifting thousand feet of film in the hopper of the
machine, to later on astonish gaping crowds with a faithful delineation
of the perils attending the ordinary life of a motion-picture player.




CHAPTER XII

WHEN SWORDS CLASHED


"I wonder if that winds up the whole show?" asked Billy Worth, a short
time later, as Alec and Monkey Stallings joined him, while there was
an unusual bustle among the numerous retinue of the hard-working
stage manager.

"Not on your life, Billy," observed Alec, "though I'm all in myself
so far as taking any more wonderful pictures goes, because I've used
my last film, which I consider hard luck.  Hugh just told me the worst
is yet to come."

"What! are they going to make out to burn the old castle down?  Is that
worrying you, Alec?" asked the Stallings boy.

"Sure it is," frankly confessed Alec.  "Of course, the fire will be
a whole lot of a fake; that is, much smoke, and no real danger to the
girl shut up in that high turret room; but, all the same, it's going
to do considerable harm to the building, which may queer it for Aunt
Susan's purposes."

"Well, what can you say?" demanded Billy.  "These people have put
up the money to cover any damage they may do, and money talks every
time.  Here comes Hugh back to tell us what the programme is.  He's
just left that hustler of a director, and the chances are Hugh knows
all about it, because he's made a big hit with the manager."

"Hugh always does make people look up to him, somehow," mused Alec,
as though it often puzzled him to know just how the other managed it.

"There, Arthur has joined him, too, and is coming along," Billy went
on to say.  "He's about finished helping the doctor take care of the
wounded yeomen who had the bad luck to be caught when that treacherous
old wall caved in."

The scout master, accompanied by Arthur, quickly joined them, to be
greeted by a shower of eager questions.

"I can tell you all about it, fellows," said Hugh, making as if to
ward off an attack.  "Mr. Jefferson, the manager, says he figures
on completing his work in the one visit, and has made all necessary
preparations.  It's a tremendous job to fetch his big company all
the way from New York up here.  If they make good to-day they expect
to go back in the morning, or perhaps to-night, if they can catch
the late train.  Otherwise they'll have to make another try to-morrow.
Personally, I think they'll make good to-day."

"What's the next stunt, Hugh?" asked Alec, his voice more or less
betraying the eagerness and concern he felt.

"Oh, from what I can gather," answered the scout master, smilingly,
"it runs about like this: The forces headed by the hero knight have
carried the outer works of the fortress castle in which the villain
has the fair heroine shut up in that turret room.  The invaders, having
made a breach in the walls and swarmed over in various places, will
now pursue the few desperate defenders of the castle through this
passage; and that, with many a desperate hand-to-hand fight.  Always
the knight in armor is seen hewing his way steadily through all opposition,
with one object in view.  Of course this is to meet the scoundrel,
and finish him, which he eventually does after a dreadful sword fight."

"Whew!" gasped Billy, listening with round eyes to the stirring story.

Alec, too, was deeply interested, but his professional instinct caused
him to remark:

"They'll have to burn heaps and heaps of flashlight powder to get all
those inside effects.  Wish they'd let me see just how they manage it,
but it would be apt to queer the value of the picture to have, a modern
Boy Scout appear in it.  If I get a good chance, though, I've a notion
to ask Mr. Jefferson."

"You'll never be able to make it, Alec," Hugh told him.  "He's the
busiest man on earth.  He has to be thinking of fifty things at once."

"Go on, Hugh, and tell us the rest," urged Billy, pawing at the sleeve
of the other, which action he doubtless meant to be an urgent second
to his appeal.

"Every once in a while there will be glimpses shown of Rebecca in her
dungeon, looking out of the little opening, and carrying on as if
nearly frightened to death, for gusts of smoke will be circling around
her, and she is supposed to know that the fire is getting closer all
the time."

"Wow, that must make it a thriller for fair!" exclaimed Monkey Stallings,
who was known to love exciting stories, though his watchful mother
kept a tight rein on his propensity to indulge along those lines, and
censored all books he brought into the house before allowing him to
devour them.

"Of course," remarked Alec, flippantly.  "It goes without saying that
eventually knight in shining armor, Ivanhoe, or whoever he may be,
gets to the locked door of the turret tower room, bursts his way through,
and saves the lovely maiden, like they always do in stories of those
olden times.  But here's hoping the fire doesn't get out of control,
and set in to destroy the best part of this wonderful castle.  Such
things have been known to happen, I've read."

"Gosh!" ejaculated Billy with morse than his accustomed vigor, "you're
only thinking of the humbug old castle, Alec, and what chance there
would be for your rich aunt to buy the same if half burned down.
Guess you forget the poor girl shut up in that lonesome turret room;
what d'ye suppose would become of _her_ if the fire got beyond control?"

"And not a ladder in sight, either," added Monkey Stallings, dismally,
as he swept his eyes around in a nervous way.  "As for a fire company,
there isn't one closer than Danbury, which is all of ten miles away.
Whew! I'm beginning to wish the whole business was over with, boys, and
the troupe jogging along back to the town they came from in all those
big automobiles."

Hugh made no remark just then, but perhaps this suggestion of possible
trouble cause him a little concern.  He could be seen looking gravely
toward the immense pile of real and imitation stone as though mentally
figuring what it might be possible to do in a sudden emergency.

As numerous events in the past had proved, Hugh Hardin was always a
great hand for mapping out things beforehand.  He believed in the
principle of preparing for war in times of peace, so as not to be
taken unawares.

"A man insures his home," Hugh often said in explanation of this habit,
"when everything seems lovely and safe, not when the fire is raging,
and his property going up in flame and smoke."

The stage manager had determined that there was no need of repeating
the last wild scene where the castle was taken, and a tottering wall
fell unexpectedly in the midst of the furious struggle.  Let it stand,
he had determined, accident and all.  It appeared to be almost perfect
"copy," and would show up as a faithful portrayal of the stupendous
perils attending the efforts of his company in enacting just one phase
of a romantic drama of the days of chivalry.

"I notice that they are meaning to use two machines and a couple or
camera men, so as to get all the excitement down pat," ventured Alec,
presently, as they stood and watched the hurrying people of the play
in their remarkable attire suggestive of those feudal days of old.

"One is to be kept busy outside," explained Hugh, "while the other
takes pictures of the fighting going on through the corridors and
apartments of the castle, while the knight and his valorous retainers
are battling their way closer and closer to the place where the captive
'maiden' is held fast behind the locked door.  I got all that stuff
straight from Mr. Jefferson, and those are his own words, so don't
laugh."

"Huh! it's too serious a business to do much laughing," grunted Billy.
"I'm just itching all over to see how it comes out.  There, that must
have been the signal to start.  I can see some of the men beginning
to make an awful smoke with the apparatus they're handling.  What a
good imitation of the real thing it is!"

"Whoopee! listen to the big swords clashing inside the castle, will
you?" cried Monkey Stallings.  "Say, we're missing great stunts,
believe me, in having to stay out here.  I've got half a notion-----"

However, Monkey did not finish the sentence, whatever rash notion was
flitting through his active mind.  Possibly he had indulged in a wild
dream that for one of his climbing abilities it might prove feasible
to reach a window above, and by thrusting his head through the
aperture see something of the wonderful things going on in the
passages where the crowd was thronging.

It was the fact of Hugh looking meaningly at him that caused Monkey
to stop in the midst of his sentence, for he saw by the expression
on the face of the scout master that Hugh would not permit any meddling.
The enormous expense and labor attending the taking of that picture
must not be wasted through any injudicious act on the part of himself
or one of his chums.

As the minutes passed the confusion became almost a riot, so it seemed
to Billy.  The shouts of the fighting men grew hoarse with constant
repetitions, for naturally they had to give vent to their emotions,
or else much of their efforts would have lacked in the genuine feeling.
How those swords did whack and beat upon each other as slowly but
surely the defenders of the castle were being cut down one by one!

It was terribly realistic, too, with the vast volumes of smoke rising
up in billows, and here and there what seemed to be a red tongue of
fire shooting through the appalling waves of black vapor.

Presently, as the boys understood, matters would reach a climax.  This
was when the hero knight attained the goal for which he was striving
so valiantly.

Then he would be seen attacking the fastened door furiously, while
inside and out that ominous smoke curled in wreaths about him.  In
the end, just when it seemed as though all would be lost, of course,
the knight must batter his way in through the broken door, and the
dashing rescue would be complete.

Hugh was beginning to feel nervous, and with a reason.  While his
chums' were wholly wrapped up in observing the numerous exciting
incidents that fell under their observation, and connected with the
work of the laboring players, the scout master had made a sudden
discovery that worried him.

It was a very small matter, and would never have been noticed by any
one whose training had not been that of a scout, accustomed to observing
everything happening around him.  But small matters may become _deciding_
factors.

The wind had shifted all of a sudden, and besides coming from a new
quarter was rapidly growing in violence.  Hugh knew this from the way
the smoke had turned and was now sweeping toward the southeast.  This
fact, while trifling in itself, might, as he well knew, assume a
terrible significance when it was remembered that a dozen industrious
supers were playing with fire, and causing it to appear that the whole
wing of the castle were enveloped in flames, real or make-believe.

Hugh had eyes for nothing else after making that thrilling discovery.
He watched with his nerves on edge, and at the same time began to
think within that active brain of his what his plan of campaign must
be should the worst that he feared come to pass.

Those hoarse shouts of the combatants, the clang of steel smiting
steel, the roar of the manager's voice through his big megaphone,
the shrieks of the women connected with the troupe, induced by the
real excitement of the occasion---all these sounds fell upon deaf
ears as Hugh gripped his chum Arthur by the arm and called his attention
to the impending peril, becoming greater with every second.

"The wind, don't you see it's whipped around, and is coming from a
new quarter?" was the tenor of what he called in the other's ear.
"If that fire gets away from those supers it's going to give them a
heap of trouble!  Yes, it will chase those fighters out of the passages
in a hurry, and I'm afraid it'll even cut off the poor girl who is
supposed to be locked in that turret room."

"Hugh, look! look!" ejaculated Arthur, in sudden excitement; "Just as
you said, I do believe the fire has got beyond their control already.
Listen to the way everybody is whooping it up now.  It's real fright
that we hear, and no make-believe!"




CHAPTER XIII

WELL DONE, SCOUTS!


Hugh was glad that he had foreseen just such an emergency as the one
that now confronted the motion-picture players.  It afforded him a
chance to get busy without wasting any precious time in laying out
plans.

The men who had been inside the building began to come rushing out,
some dragging comrades who may have temporarily found themselves unable
to walk, owing to the fatigue influenced by their recent terrific
efforts, and also the weight of the armor which they were wearing.

Everybody looked alarmed and distressed, and with reason, for it was
now seen that the wing where the girl was shut up in that turret room
was enveloped in real flames, which, whipped by the rising wind,
threatened to consume the whole structure in so far as it consisted
of wood made to resemble genuine stone.

The director was again shouting hoarsely through his megaphone, but
he was now up against a situation that none of them had foreseen, so
that consequently no preparations had been made toward meeting it.
Men ran this way and that as though they had temporarily taken
leave of their senses.  Women could be seen wringing their hands,
and shrieking wildly.

Although the outside camera man undoubtedly realized that this was
anything but a sham now, he never once ceased grinding away at his
machine.  Long experience in these lines had convinced him of the
great value of a stirring scene like this; and besides, his services
were hardly needed in the work of saving the one whose life seemed
to be in deadly peril.

"We must do something, and right away at that!" called Hugh.  "Come
along with me, every one, I've got a scheme that may be made to work."

They followed close at his heels.  Evidently it did not enter into
the head of the scout master to think, of applying for permission
from the stage manager before starting to try out his suddenly formed
plan.  Hugh realized very well that this was an occasion where that
energetic gentleman would be at a loss what to tell him.  Besides,
a wideawake scout, accustomed to doing his own thinking, should be
better equipped to manage such an affair as this than a man whose
talents ran in quite another direction.

The first thing Hugh sought to get hold of was a long and stout rope
which he had noticed lying on the ground near by, together with numerous
other things which the company had thought to fetch along with them,
having an eye to possible need.

"Lay hold of that ax, Alec!" he told the other, who had managed to
leave his beloved camera back of a tree, under the impression that it
would hinder him in the execution of the work Hugh had laid out for
himself and churns to perform.

Some of the players had by this time begun to notice the little bunch
of khaki-clad lads running toward the burning wing of the castle.
They commenced to shout out to them, perhaps encouragingly, or it may
be intending to warn them not to attempt anything rash.

Little Hugh cared what their cries might mean.  He had his plan arranged,
and believed it could be carried to success if only speedy action
were taken.

"We've got to get to the roof of that tower!" he told the others, as
they drew near the fire, and could begin to feel the heat it was
beginning to throw out as it crept upward, whipped by the rising wind.
"Billy, I want you and Arthur to stay down under the walls and be
ready to receive the girl, if we manage to, get things going.  Understand
that, both of you?"

"All right, if you say so, Hugh!" replied Arthur, though it could be
noticed that he looked greatly disappointed because he had not been
selected to accompany the rescuing party.

Billy did not make any reply.  Perhaps he was, secretly, as well pleased
to be assigned to that task, because Billy, being a heavy-weight,
never made a success of climbing; and from all appearance there was
bound to be more or less of that style of work ahead of those who were
chosen to go aloft.

Having thus divided his party, Hugh hurried toward a window of the
main building close by.  He remembered that it was possible to gain,
the roof of the castle---and unless the flames became too menacing---by
creeping along this they would be able to reach the top of the turret
tower.  If no other means were found available for gaining access
to the room of the prisoner, Hugh expected to make good use of that
axe, and force an entrance through the roof itself, as he had seen
the Oakvale volunteer firemen do on more than one occasion.

Billy and Arthur watched their chums climbing hastily through that
window.  Doubtless their hearts were throbbing with excitement, and
deep down those two were hoping and praying that not only would Hugh,
Alec and Monkey Stallings be able to come back alive and unharmed,
but that they might also accomplish the object that had enlisted their
services.

Meanwhile the trio of scouts found themselves groping their way along
smoke-filled passages.  Hugh made the others keep in close touch with
him while this was going on.  He did not mean that they should become
separated, and something dreadful mar their endeavor to make themselves
useful.

Fortunately the fire had not as yet reached the stairway leading upward,
so that in a brief space of time the three scouts found themselves
in the corridor where so lately a terrific combat had been taking
place.  They even stumbled over some fragment of imitation steel armor
which may have been hurriedly thrown aside at the time the alarm of
fire had sounded, causing such a hasty stampede on the part of the
motion-picture players.

Apparently, while the retreat of the actors in this near-tragedy had
been of a hurried nature, they had seen to it that no one of their
number had been left in the corridor to become a victim of the flames.
Hugh made sure of this, even as he pushed his way along.

A minute later and the boys were climbing out of a certain window on
to the roof.  Hugh had taken note of that very circumstance himself
when prowling about the remarkable building; in fact, he had even
half pulled himself up to see what the roof looked like, though never
dreaming at the time he would so soon find need of his knowledge.

Monkey Stallings was, of course, in his element.  None of the others
could do nearly so well as he when it came to this sort of thing.
Probably Hugh had remembered this circumstance when picking the acrobat
out as one of his party, instead of choosing Arthur Cameron.

He sent the Stallings boy on ahead, and gave him to understand that he
was expected to assist the others whenever he could.  So they managed
to gain the roof of the main building, and started in, the direction
of the wing that was being fast enveloped in fiercely leaping flames.

When the trio of scouts were discovered by the clusters of appalled
actors down below, and many fingers were pointed up at them, cheers
began to arise.  Undoubtedly those quick-witted players guessed what
Hugh had in mind, and as it seemed to be the only possible chance to
save the poor girl from her prison room, they one and all wished the
courageous lads godspeed in their mission.

Hugh felt considerably relieved when he discovered that it would be
possible to gain the other roof from the main structure.  There was
really no time to lose, however, for the fire seemed to be getting
a pretty good headway, and any delay was likely to imperil their chances
of success.

They had to get down on their hands and knees and crawl part of the
way across.  Had they been less agile they never could have made it,
and just here it was seen how wisely the scout master had acted when
he failed to choose clumsy if willing Billy Worth as one of their
number.

Once upon the smaller roof covering the turret tower, Hugh found that
it was a matter of impossibility to lower themselves so as to gain
the slits of windows in the walls, made more for appearances than
for any particular use.  And even though they were able to reach one
of these he doubted whether any of them could manage to crawl through.

There was nothing for it then but to attack the roof with the ax,
which Alec had managed to cling to through all his climbing.  Hugh
snatched the implement from the hands of his churn, and went at it.
The ax bit into the roof with each hearty blow, and Hugh worked like
a beaver, knowing that there was constant danger they might be caught
by the creeping flames before their object had been accomplished.

Afterwards, when speaking about their experiences up there on that
roof, Alec and Monkey Stallings always declared they had never seen
any one wield an ax with more telling effect than Hugh did on that
wonderful occasion.  Those who were below had a fair view of what
was going on aloft, whenever the wind carried the smoke aside, as
their encouraging cheers testified from time to time.

When Hugh found his muscles beginning to lag, he handed the implement
over to Alec, knowing the other must be fairly wild to have a hand
in the labor.  How the chips did fly and scatter with each and every
blow of that descending ax!  Alec put every ounce of vim he could
muster into each stroke, while if he faltered there was Monkey Stallings
opening and shutting his two hands as though eager to take up the
good work.

Then came the critical moment when the ax cut through, and a small
gap appeared out of which a spiral of smoke began to ooze.  Larger
grew the hole, and then Alec, dripping with perspiration, fairly gasping
for breath, handed the ax over to the third member of the group, after
which the work continued furiously.

Finally Hugh stopped Monkey Stallings and made motions that he was
about to go through the aperture.  The others saw him vanish, and
a brief but terrible period of suspense followed.  Then through the
gap in the roof appeared the head of the young woman who was playing
the romantic part of the Jewess, Rebecca.  Through all this tragic
happening she, must have managed to retain her self-possession in
a way that was simply wonderful, for she was now able to do her part
toward working up through the hole in the roof, assisted by the two
scouts above.

When those below discovered how success had thus far rewarded the
efforts of Hugh and his equally quick-witted fellow scouts, the cheer
that broke forth could have been heard miles away, so great was their
admiration for the work of the three boys.

However, there was still more to be done if they would escape from
the trap arranged between the rival elements, the wind and the fire.
To return over the same route by which they had come was now impossible,
since the fire had cut off escape by that course.

This was a possibility foreseen by Hugh when he concluded to take
that long and serviceable rope aloft with him.  By this means the
girl could first be lowered to the ground at a point where the flames
had not yet reached; and afterwards it would be little trouble for,
himself and chums to also slide down to safety.  Hugh always paid
much attention to details.

Accordingly this was what they hastily set about doing.  They were
fortunate in having to deal with a plucky little woman.  She understood
just what was expected of her, and indeed, to see the way she assisted
them secure the rope about her body under the arms, and then bade them
swing her free, from the parapet of the tower, one might suspect that
she had long since practiced for just this sort of thrilling picture.

All went well, and one by one the three scouts came sliding down the
rope later on, none of them so much as having an eyelash singed, though
the flames roared as if angry at having lost a victim.

"And," Billy was heard to remark when the boys could break away from
the excited players, all of whom wanted to squeeze their hands, and
say what they thought of the clever work,  "Don't forget every
minute of the time that camera man was turning his crank like fury.
He got it all down pat, too, boys, as maybe we'll see for ourselves
one of these fine days."




CHAPTER XIV

OAKVALE GETS A THRILL


"What's the news, Alec?" demanded Billy Worth, some weeks after the
events narrated in the foregoing chapters took place.

They were just entering the town hall of Oakvale, where there was
about to be given a select entertainment consisting of the most part
of educational motion pictures.  It was intended for the benefit of
the local orphan asylum, so that every seat in the big building was
being rapidly filled.

A number of the other members of the scout organization were gathered
near by, as a special section of the chairs had been reserved for
the troupe, for certain reasons which no one seemed exactly to understand.
It was only known that Hugh and Lieutenant Denmead, the regular scout
master, had made some arrangement with those who were, responsible for
getting up the benefit performance.

"Oh! I had a letter from my Aunt Susan in this afternoon's mail,"
replied Alec, as he nodded to several acquaintances near by, girls
belonging to Oakvale High School.

"About that place up in the country where we spent our last week-end
outing, and had such a lively time---eh, Alec?" suggested Billy,
with a wide grin.

"Yes, and the meanness of you fellows keeping the whole business to
yourselves all this time," commented Blake Merton, severely.

"We just know there was something _remarkable_ happened to you up
there," spoke up Don Miller, the leader of the Fox Patrol, "but no
matter what we hinted, never a word could we get any of you to explain
about it.  What's it all mean, Hugh?"

"Wait and see," was the mysterious answer that again baffled the
curiosity of the eager listeners, some of whom had really begun to hope
that Hugh might think it time to remove the seal of absolute secrecy
with which the outing had been enveloped so long.  "And Alec, suppose you
tell us what your aunt said in her letter.  You don't look as if it
held good news, that's certain."

Alec laughed good-naturedly.

"Oh! she complimented me like everything because of those grand pictures
I sent her, and said that the account I gave of the thrilling happenings
up there made her satisfied with the little investment she had incurred.
I was welcome to the camera, and she also meant to send me another
present soon, because she found herself quite interested in scout
work.  But she couldn't think of putting the deal through for
that---er---place.  She says after what happened there, it's likely
to be a shrine for curious-minded folks for a long time to come, and
as she wants absolute quiet, that would not suit her.  So you see, just
as I expected, that deal's off."

All this strange manner of talk greatly aroused the listeners curiosity.
They tried in turn to coax Hugh, Billy, Alec, Arthur or Monkey Stallings
to "open up and tell us what it all means, won't you like a good fellow?"
but those worthies only looked wise, nodded their heads, and told them
to "hold their horses," and in good time they would be treated to a
little surprise that would pay them for all their waiting.

The hall soon filled up, with seating space at a premium.  It was
in a good cause and backed by the Women's League for Town Improvement.
The orphans needed a good many things to make them comfortable for the
winter, and this was to be one of several methods employed to obtain
these articles, which the town did not see fit to supply.

Walter Osborne, Bud Morgan and several of the other scouts had been
silently watching Hugh and his immediate chums.  Their attention was
especially directed toward Billy Worth, who seemed to be so nervous
that he could hardly keep his seat.

"It's my opinion," remarked Walter, sagely, "that there's going to
be something of a surprise sprung on the rest of us to-night.  I've
been keeping tabs on Billy, and to see him grin, and look so happy
and proud gives the thing away.  He just can't keep his face straight,
he feels so important."

"But what can it be?" asked Jack Durham.  "The whole entertainment
to-night is made up of Professor Wakefield with his violin, and three
selected moving pictures."

"Yes," added Bud Morgan, referring to a paper he held in his hand,
"and one of these is a comic, a second a trip through the island of
Ceylon, showing things just as if a fellow was there on the spot,
while the third and last seems to be a series of pictures showing
just how a company of players go about when engaged in making one of
their wonderful films."

"I don't see how Billy can expect to be in touch with any of those
things," commented Walter, more puzzled than ever.  "We'll just have
to wait and see, as Hugh told us.  It may be that they've coaxed Hugh
to consent to get up there on the platform to-night, and tell all
about what happened to them the time they went off to spend the week-end
up the country."

"Walter, I wouldn't be surprised if you'd guessed it, after all,"
said one of the other fellows; and then as a loud clapping of hands
announced that the well-known local violinist was about to make his
bow to the big audience, the boys stopped exchanging opinions, and
settled down to the policy of "watchful waiting" so often spoken of
by the occupant of the Executive Chair at Washington.

The educational value of the "Trip through Ceylon" could not be gainsaid,
and the humorous film caused much laughter, and boisterous merriment.
Finally the announcement was made that they were now about to be
treated to a most wonderful series of pictures, showing the details
of how one of the best-known companies of moving-picture artists went
about their work when engaged in producing a drama of olden days,
with an appropriate setting and background.

They were first of all discovered starting forth from their hotel in
the city, and taking train for some place in the country, together with
much paraphernalia connected with their undertaking, so that it looked
very much like an exodus on the part of a whole village of fashionables.

Next the pictures showed them leaving the train, at some country town,
where a whole string of capacious cars awaited them, into which they
crowded, joking and laughing, and carrying bundles without end.

Then another scene disclosed the company clad in all manner of remarkable
garments, all of which might be recognized as having to do with the
historical time of the Crusades, when knights in armor attended by
their faithful squires were wont to roam the country in search of
adventure.

Of course the younger element in the audience watched all this with
exceeding interest.  They doubtless sensed with that intuition boys
always display, that sooner or later there would necessarily come along
heaps of fighting, and stirring pictures, when those men in shining
armor met in deadly combat.

One by one, the scenes passed in review, and finally there was flashed
upon the screen a picture of what seemed to be a veritable olden castle,
true to tradition, turreted tower, drawbridge, portcullis, deep moat,
apparently unscalable walls, and all.

Just at this interesting juncture, as the music happened to die down
temporarily, a boy who had been around some was heard to say aloud,
though he had not expected to make himself conspicuous:

"If that isn't the old place called Randall's Folly, I'll eat my hat!"

Walter Osborne gave Dud Morgan a quick dig in the ribs.

"Hey! it's coming, you mark my words if it isn't!" he hissed in the
other's ear.  "Just look at Billy Worth there, bobbing up and down as
if he might be sitting on tacks.  And see how he grins, and looks
prouder than a turkey gobbler.  Something's going to break loose right
away, Bud, believe me."

Well, it did.

When presently, after that first onslaught of the gallant followers of
the hero knight, the motion-picture players were seen to be "resting
up" between acts, and those who had been injured in the fracas were
being attended to, a shout arose.

"Hey! what's this I see?" yelled a boy's strident voice.  "Right
there along with all them knights and ladies there's a Boy Scout helping
take care of the fellows knocked out in that scrap.  And, say, it's
our own Arthur Cameron, would you believe it?"

"And there's Hugh!  Yes, and look at our Billy Worth strutting around
there as big as life.  Oh, you Billy, it takes, you to get in, the
limelight every time!"

All sorts of shouts were rising in different parts of the hall as the
audience discovered the well-known lads belonging to their own town.
Most of them began to understand now why those fellows had persisted
in keeping so mute.  Evidently they must have known that this wonderful
picture was coming in time to be shown at the benefit performance.

Everybody was eagerly waiting to see what followed.  When the wall
fell there was a series of low exclamations of horror, for they were
intelligent enough to realize that this had not been a part of the
real programme, and also that the chances were some of the unfortunates
must have been severely injured.

Then came the picture revealing how the five scouts sprang forward
and assisted in the work of rescuing those caught by the falling rocks;
also how Arthur, as might be expected, did his part in taking care
of the injured.  How proud many of those present felt at seeing the
manly way in which Hugh and his comrades rose to the occasion, and
did their calling great credit.

A tense stillness followed those loud cheers, for, an announcement
had been displayed relating how, owing to a shift of the wind, the
fire had spread, causing a sudden evacuation of the forces battling
in the passages and rooms of the castle; and also how through some
misfortune the lovely heroine was really and truly caught up there
in that lonely tower room, hemmed in by the cruel flames.

Then, as the startling scene moved on, the five hundred eager spectators
saw Hugh lead his fellow scouts to the rescue---watched three of them
vanish through that gaping window, to appear a little later on the roof,
followed with strained eyes their furious attack on the roof of the
tower, and finally saw them lower the lady in safety to the ground,
where Billy and Arthur, and many of the motion-picture players, waited
to receive them.

And last but not least, just as the scene closed, the three scouts
were discovered sliding swiftly down the rope past the hungry tongues
of fire.

The triumph of the scouts was complete.  Men shouted, boys shrilled,
and women laughed and cried and kissed each other.  Never before had
such excitement taken possession of an audience in Oakvale.  How proud
it made them to realize that their local organization was being advertised
all over the broad land, yes, even in other foreign lands as well,
it might be, so that Oakvale would soon become famous because of its
scout troop.

Through it all Hugh seemed to sit unmoved, though he shook hands with
the admiring crowds as they came up to offer congratulations, and
laughed heartily to see how Billy Worth strutted around, swelled with
pride.

"It was a whole lot of fun while it lasted," Hugh was telling a bunch
of the fellows, after the show was over.  "But when a thing is done
with you can't extract much enjoyment out of the memory.  What I'm
more concerned about right at this, minute is where we are going to
find another chance for an outing in the coming Thanksgiving holidays.
I'd like some of you to get busy thinking up a scheme, that will just
about fill the bill."

That somebody did engineer a plan along lines that promised to take
some of the fellows out of the beaten rut for the brief holidays,
can be set down as certain, judging from the nature of the title of
the succeeding volume of this series, "The Boy Scouts on the Roll
of Honor," and which, it is hoped; all who have enjoyed the present
story will procure without delay.

THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Boy Scouts with the Motion Picture
Players, by Robert Shaler

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MOTION PICTURE PLAYERS ***

***** This file should be named 12948.txt or 12948.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/9/4/12948/

Produced by Jim Ludwig

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
