Project Gutenberg's The Tale of Dickie Deer Mouse, by Arthur Scott Bailey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Tale of Dickie Deer Mouse

Author: Arthur Scott Bailey

Illustrator: Diane Petersen

Release Date: July 31, 2006 [EBook #18953]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALE OF DICKIE DEER MOUSE ***




Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





[Illustration: The Tale of Dickie Deer Mouse]

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: "Why do you want buds?"]

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

THE TALE OF DICKIE DEER MOUSE

BY
ARTHUR SCOTT BAILEY

AUTHOR OF
THE CUFFY BEAR BOOKS SLEEPY-TIME TALES, ETC.

Illustrations by
Diane Petersen

GROSSET & DUNLAP
PUBLISHERS NEW YORK

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Copyright, 1918, by
GROSSET & DUNLAP

PRINTED IN U.S.A.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

CONTENTS

CHAPTER                              PAGE

      I A Little Gentleman                9
     II Hunting a Home                   14
    III A Startled Sleeper               19
     IV The Blackbird's Nest             25
      V Dickie's Summer Home             30
     VI A Warning                        34
    VII Noisy Visitors                   39
   VIII In the Cornfield                 44
     IX Fatty Coon Needs Help            49
      X A Bit of Advice                  53
     XI A Search in Vain                 58
    XII A Little Surprise                65
   XIII The Feathers Fly                 70
    XIV Making Ready for Winter          75
     XV A Plunge In The Dark             80
    XVI  A Lucky Find                    85
   XVII  A Slight Mistake                89
  XVIII  Too Many Cousins                95
    XIX  The Wrong Turn                 100
     XX  Bedfellows                     107
    XXI  One Way To Keep Warm           112
   XXII  Queer Mr. Pine Finch           117
  XXIII  A Feast At Last                122

-----------------------------------------------------------------------




[Illustration]

THE TALE OF DICKIE DEER MOUSE

I

A LITTLE GENTLEMAN


All the four-footed folk in the neighborhood agreed that Dickie Deer
Mouse was well worth knowing. Throughout Pleasant Valley there was no
one else so gentle as he.

To be sure, Jasper Jay wore beautiful--perhaps even gaudy--clothes; but
his manners were so shocking that nobody would ever call him a
gentleman.

As for Dickie Deer Mouse, he was always tastefully dressed in fawn color
and white. And except sometimes in the spring, when he needed a new
coat, he was a real joy to see. For he both looked and acted like a
well-bred little person.

It is too bad that there were certain reasons--which will appear
later--why some of his feathered neighbors did not like him. But even
they had to admit that Dickie was a spick-and-span young chap.

Wherever he was white he was white as snow. And many of the wild people
wondered how he could scamper so fast through the woods and always keep
his white feet spotless.

Possibly it was because his mother had taught him the way when he was
young; for his feet--and the under side of him--were white even when he
was just a tiny fellow, so young that the top side of him was gray
instead of fawn colored.

How his small white feet would twinkle as he frisked about in the
shadows of the woods and ran like a squirrel through the trees! And how
his sharp little cries would break the wood-silence as he called to his
friends in a brisk chatter, which sounded like that of the squirrels,
only ever so far away!

In many other ways Dickie Deer Mouse was like Frisky Squirrel himself.
Dickie's idea of what a good home ought to be was much the same as
Frisky's: they both thought that the deserted nest of one of the big
Crow family made as fine a house as any one could want. And they
couldn't imagine that any food could possibly be better than nuts,
berries and grain.

To be sure, Dickie Deer Mouse liked his nuts to have thin shells. But
that was because he was smaller than Frisky; so of course his jaws and
teeth were not so strong.

Then, too, Dickie Deer Mouse had a trick of gathering good things to
eat, which he hid away in some safe place, so that he would not have to
go hungry during the winter, when the snow lay deep upon the ground. And
even Frisky Squirrel was no spryer at carrying beechnuts--or any other
goody--to his secret cupboard than little white-footed Dickie Deer
Mouse.

It was no wonder that Dickie could be cheerful right in the dead of
winter, when he had a fine store of the very best that the fields and
forest yielded, to keep him sleek and fat and happy. So even on the
coldest nights, when the icy wind whipped the tree-tops, and the cold,
pale stars peeped down among the branches, Dickie scampered through the
woods with his friends and had the gayest of times.

No one would have thought that he had a care in the world.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

II

HUNTING A HOME


Warm weather was at hand. And Dickie Deer Mouse gave up frolicking with
his friends for a time, because he needed to find a pleasant place in
which to spend the summer.

He had his eye on a nest high in the top of a tall elm, where a certain
black rascal known as old Mr. Crow had lived for a long while.

Now, Dickie had heard a bit of gossip, to the effect that the old
gentleman had moved to another tree nearer to Farmer Green's cornfield.
So Dickie wanted to lose no time. He was afraid that if he waited, some
brisk member of the Squirrel family would settle himself in Mr. Crow's
old home.

Without telling anybody what was in his head, Dickie Deer Mouse set
forth one pleasant, warm night in the direction of the great elm, where
he hoped to pass a number of delightful months.

It was some distance to the tall tree. But the night was fine, and
Dickie enjoyed his journey, though once he stopped and shivered when he
heard the wailing whistle of a screech owl.

"That's Simon Screecher!" Dickie Deer Mouse exclaimed under his breath.
"I know his voice. And I hope he won't come this way!"

Dickie halted for a few minutes, near an old oak with spreading roots,
under which he intended to hide in case Simon Screecher should suddenly
appear.

But he soon decided that Simon was headed for another part of the woods,
for his quavering cry grew fainter and fainter. So Dickie promptly
forgot his fright and scampered on again faster than before, to make up
the time he had lost.

Though he travelled through the flickering shadows like a brown and
white streak, he did not pant the least bit when he reached old Mr.
Crow's elm. He did not need to pause at the foot of the tree to get his
breath, but scurried up it as if climbing was one of the easiest things
he did.

Mr. Crow's big nest was so far from the ground that many people would
not have cared to visit it except with the help of an elevator. But
Dickie Deer Mouse never stopped to think of such a thing. Of course it
would have done him no good, anyway, to wish for an elevator, for there
was none in all Pleasant Valley. In fact, even Johnnie Green himself had
only heard of--and never seen--one.

It took Dickie Deer Mouse only a few moments to reach the top of the
tall elm, where Mr. Crow's bulky nest, built of sticks and lined with
grass and moss, rested in a crotch formed by three branches.

Dickie had never before been so close to Mr. Crow's old home. And now he
stood still and looked at it with great interest. It was ever so much
bigger than he had supposed, and exactly the sort of dwelling--cool and
airy--that he had hoped to find for his summer home.

"I don't see what sort of house the old gentleman can want that would be
better than this," Dickie Deer Mouse remarked to himself. "But it is a
long way from the cornfield, to be sure." And then he climbed quickly
up the side of the nest and whisked down inside it.

The next moment a great commotion frightened him nearly out of his wits.
A deafening squawking smote Dickie Deer Mouse's big ears. And something
struck him a number of blows that knocked his breath quite out of him.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

III

A STARTLED SLEEPER


Of course Dickie Deer Mouse ought not to have been so ready to believe
that stray bit of gossip about Mr. Crow. It is true that the old black
scamp had _talked_ about moving to a new place nearer Farmer Green's
cornfield. But his plan had gone no further than that.

He was sound asleep in his bed when Dickie Deer Mouse jumped down beside
him. And when Mr. Crow suddenly waked up it would be very hard to say
which of the two was the more startled.

For a few moments Mr. Crow screamed loudly for help. And he flapped and
floundered about as if he didn't know which way to turn, nor what to do.

During the uproar Dickie Deer Mouse managed to slip out of Mr. Crow's
house without being seen. But he was too polite to run away. Instead of
hurrying off to escape a scolding from Mr. Crow he clung to a near-by
branch and called as loudly as he could:

"Don't be alarmed, sir! There's no one here but me. And I ask your
pardon for disturbing you."

Dickie Deer Mouse had to repeat that speech several times before Mr.
Crow noticed him. But at last the old gentleman caught sight of his
visitor. And when he heard what Dickie said he looked far from pleasant.

"_Asking_ my pardon is one thing," Mr. Crow spluttered. "And _receiving_
it is another."

"I'm very sorry," Dickie Deer Mouse replied. "I didn't mean to frighten
you."

Mr. Crow gave a sudden hoarse _haw-haw_.

"Pooh!" he cried. "You don't think I was scared, do you?"

"You called for help," Dickie reminded him.

"Certainly I did," Mr. Crow agreed. "I wanted somebody to help you out
of my house, before I trampled on you and broke one of your legs--or
maybe two or three of 'em."

That explanation gave Dickie Deer Mouse another surprise; for he had
supposed all the time that Mr. Crow didn't know who--or what--had
awakened him.

"Oh!" he cried. "I thought that you thought I was somebody else."

Mr. Crow glared at him.

"I thought that you thought that I thought----" he squalled. He was so
angry that his tongue became sadly twisted; and he all but choked.

Meanwhile Dickie Deer Mouse waited respectfully until Mr. Crow had
recovered his speech.

"What are you doing here at this hour?" Mr. Crow demanded at last.

"I thought----" Dickie began.

"There you go again!" the old gentleman interrupted him testily. "I
didn't ask you what you _thought_. I asked you what you were _doing_."

"I'm not doing anything just now," Dickie Deer Mouse faltered.

"Yes, you are!" Mr. Crow corrected him. "You're sitting on a limb of my
tree.... Get off it at once!"

So Dickie Deer Mouse moved to a more distant perch.

"Now you're sitting on another!" Mr. Crow exploded. "Get out of my tree
this instant!" It always made him ill-tempered to be awakened from a
sound sleep in the middle of the night.

Once more Dickie Deer Mouse asked his pardon.

"I was told," he explained, "that you had moved lately. And I did not
expect to find you here."

"Ah!" said Mr. Crow. "I know now why you came sneaking into my house.
You'd like to live here yourself."

"Pardon me!" Dickie Deer Mouse exclaimed with the lowest of bows. "You
are mistaken, Mr. Crow. Though your house is a fine, large one, it's
much too small to hold us both."

And whisking about, while Mr. Crow stared at him, he ran down the tall
elm as fast as he could go.

It was clear that if Mr. Crow wasn't going to move he would have to look
elsewhere for a summer home.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

IV

THE BLACKBIRD'S NEST


For a few days after his visit to Mr. Crow's elm, Dickie Deer Mouse kept
watch carefully of Mr. Crow's comings and goings. And he decided at last
that the old gentleman liked his home too well to leave it.

But Dickie was not discouraged. He had no doubt that he could find some
other pleasant quarters in which to spend the summer--quarters that
would prove almost as airy, and perhaps more convenient--because they
were not so high.

For there was no denying that Mr. Crow's nest was a long, long way from
the ground.

So Dickie began to search for birds' nests. And for a time he had to
suffer a great deal of scolding by his feathered neighbors. It must be
confessed that they were none too fond of Dickie Deer Mouse. There was a
story of something he was said to have done one time--a tale about his
having driven a Robin family away from their nest, in order to live in
it himself.

That seems a strange deed on the part of anyone so gentle as Dickie Deer
Mouse. But old Mr. Crow always declared that it was true. And Solomon
Owl often remarked that he wished Dickie Deer Mouse would try to drive
_him_ away from his home in the hollow hemlock.

[Illustration: Dickie scampered through the woods with his friends]

But during his hunt for birds' nests Dickie Deer Mouse was careful to
keep away from Solomon Owl, and his cousin Simon Screecher, and all the
rest of the Owl family. He contented himself with hasty peeps into nests
built by such smaller folk as Blackbirds and Robins. And if it happened
that anybody was living in one of those nests, Dickie soon found it out.
For the angry owners were sure to fly at him with screams of rage, and
peck at his head as they darted past him.

It was really not worth while getting into a fight over a bird's nest,
when there was plenty of old ones in which nobody dwelt. To be sure,
many of them were almost ready to fall apart. But Dickie Deer Mouse
finally found one to his liking--a last year's bird's nest where two
Blackbirds had reared a promising family. They had not come back to
Pleasant Valley. And there was their house, almost as good as new, just
waiting for some one to move in and make himself at home.

Nobody objected when Dickie took the old nest for his home, though many
a bird in the neighborhood remarked in his hearing that _he_ would hate
to be too lazy to build a house for himself.

Dickie Deer Mouse was too mild and gentle-mannered to make any reply to
such rude speeches. Besides, he expected to make a good many changes in
the old nest before the place was exactly what he wanted.

"I don't understand," he said aloud to nobody in particular, "why most
birds don't know how a house should be built. Of all the birds in
Pleasant Valley the only good nest-builder I know is Long Bill Wren. He
must be a very sensible fellow, because he puts a roof on his house."

Now, Dickie Deer Mouse may--or may not--have known that some of his bird
neighbors were near at hand, watching him. Certainly they must have
heard what he said, for they began to scold at the top of their voices.
And one rude listener named Jasper Jay screamed with fine scorn:

"What do you know about building a nest?" And then he laughed harshly.

But Dickie Deer Mouse only looked very wise and said nothing.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

V

DICKIE'S SUMMER HOME


Dickie Deer Mouse was busier than ever. When he wasn't looking for
food--and eating it when he had found it--he gathered cat-tail down in
Cedar Swamp.

If there was one thing that he liked in a house it was a soft bed. And
he knew that if the weather happened to be chilly now and then, he could
snuggle into the cat-tail down and sleep as comfortably as he pleased.

The swamp was none too near his new home; and he might have found moss
or shreds of bark near-by that would have served his purpose. But he
would rather have cat-tail down, even though he had to make a good many
trips back and forth before he finally lined the old bird's nest to his
liking.

Then, having finished his bed, he had to make a roof over it. So he
covered the top of his house with moss, leaving a hole right under the
eaves, for a doorway.

When Dickie's home was done he was so pleased with it that he asked all
his neighbors if they didn't like his "improvements," as he called the
additions he had made. And all his Deer Mouse relations told him that he
certainly had a fine place.

But none of the birds cared for it at all, except Long Bill Wren; and
even he remarked that the house would be better "if it was rounder."

As for Jasper Jay, he told Dickie Deer Mouse that, in his opinion, the
house was ruined.

"It's nothing but a trap," he declared. "And I'd hate to go to sleep
inside it."

His views, however, did not trouble Dickie Deer Mouse in the least. The
place suited him. And he was so happy in it that sometimes when the
weather was bad and he wasn't whisking about in the trees, or scurrying
around on the ground, he would stay inside his cozy home, with only his
head sticking out through the doorway, while his big, bright, bulging,
black eyes took in everything that happened in his dooryard.

Dickie Deer Mouse knew that one needed sharp eyes to spy him when he was
peeping from his house in that fashion. And often when somebody of whom
he was really afraid came wandering through the woods, Dickie would
keep quite still, while he watched the newcomer without being seen.

But with some of the wood folk he took no chances. Whenever he heard
Solomon Owl's rolling call, or his cousin Simon Screecher's quavering
whistle, Dickie Deer Mouse always pulled his head inside his house in a
hurry.

For they were usually on the lookout for him. And he knew it.

Of course, if they had been aware that Dickie Deer Mouse was hidden
inside his rebuilt, last year's bird's nest, either of them, with his
sharp claws, could easily have torn the moss roof off Dickie's home. But
luckily for Dickie, there were some things that they didn't know.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

VI

A WARNING


If old Mr. Crow had minded his own affairs everything would have gone
well with Dickie Deer Mouse, after he moved into his new home. But Mr.
Crow could not forget the time when Dickie had awakened him out of a
sound sleep and frightened him almost out of his mind.

So whenever he caught sight of Dickie the old gentleman was sure to drop
down upon the ground and ask him in a loud voice whose house he had
prowled into lately.

"Nobody's!" Dickie Deer Mouse always told him. And then he would assure
Mr. Crow that he was very sorry to have disturbed his rest.

It was quite like Mr. Crow, on such occasions, to act grumpy.

"I haven't had a good night's sleep since you broke into my house," he
declared to Dickie one day.

"Perhaps you're over-eating," Dickie suggested politely.

Old Mr. Crow did not appear to like that remark.

"Nothing of the sort!" he bawled. "I don't eat enough to keep a mosquito
alive."

"I often see you in the cornfield," Dickie Deer Mouse told him.

"Ha!" Mr. Crow exclaimed. "What are you doing in the cornfield, I should
like to know?"

"Sometimes I go there to get a few kernels of corn," Dickie explained.

"Ha!" Mr. Crow cried once more. "That's where the corn's going! Farmer
Green thinks I'm taking it. And so you're getting me into a peck of
trouble, young man."

Dickie Deer Mouse couldn't help being worried when Mr. Crow said that.
And he looked puzzled, too.

"I don't see," he said, "how I could have got you into a _peck_ of
trouble, Mr. Crow, for I haven't eaten a peck of Farmer Green's corn.
I've had only a few kernels of it--not more than half a pint."

"Then you've got me into a half-pint of trouble, anyway," old Mr. Crow
insisted. "And that's too much, for a person of my age. You'll have to
keep away from my--ahem!--from Farmer Green's cornfield. And what's
more, Fatty Coon says the same thing."

At the mention of Fatty Coon's name Dickie Deer Mouse had to smile.

"Fatty Coon!" he echoed. "How he does like corn!"

"Yes! But he doesn't like you," Mr. Crow snapped. "You'd better look out
for him," he warned Dickie. "He'll come to call on you some night, the
first thing you know.

"By the way, where are you living now?" Mr. Crow inquired.

But Dickie Deer Mouse made no answer. Right before Mr. Crow's sharp eyes
he vanished among the roots of a tree. And it made the old gentleman
quite peevish because he couldn't discover where Dickie Deer Mouse had
hidden himself.

For a little while Mr. Crow stood like a black statue and peered at the
tangle where Dickie Deer Mouse had disappeared. But Mr. Crow couldn't
see him anywhere. And at last his patience came to an end.

"He never answered my question," Mr. Crow grumbled. "He wouldn't tell me
where he lived. But I'll find out. I'll ask my cousin, Jasper Jay; for
there isn't much that _he_ doesn't know."

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

VII

NOISY VISITORS


Of course Jasper Jay knew where Dickie Deer Mouse lived. And he took
great pleasure in pointing out the exact spot to his curious cousin, old
Mr. Crow.

It was broad daylight when they visited the tree where Dickie's house
hung. The two rogues did not know that he was drowsing inside his snug
home, because he had been out late the night before.

No one that knew the two cousins would need to be told that they could
never talk together quietly. Perched close to Dickie's house, Mr. Crow
croaked in a hoarse voice, while Jasper Jay squalled harshly.

"This is it!" Jasper had announced, as soon as they arrived. "This is
his house. And isn't it a sight?"

"I should say so!" old Mr. Crow agreed. "It's got a roof on it--ha! ha!"

And the two visitors laughed loudly, as if they thought there was a huge
joke somewhere.

They made such a noise, from the very first, that Dickie Deer Mouse
awoke and heard almost everything they said. But he didn't mind their
remarks in the least--until he caught Fatty Coon's name.

It was old Mr. Crow who mentioned it first.

"I'll have to tell Fatty Coon about this queer house," he chuckled.
"It's too good a joke to keep. He'll be over here as soon as he knows
where to come, for he'll be glad to see it; and he wants to talk to
Dickie Deer Mouse about taking our corn."

Dickie had still felt somewhat sleepy during the first part of this talk
outside his house. But when Mr. Crow began to speak about Fatty Coon,
Dickie became instantly wide awake. He sprang quickly to his feet; and
thrusting his head through his doorway, he called in his loudest tone:

"When do you think Fatty Coon will call on me?"

The two cousins looked at each other. And then they looked all around.

"What was that strange squeaking?" Mr. Crow asked Jasper Jay.

"To me it sounded a good deal like a rusty hinge on Farmer Green's barn
door," Jasper Jay answered.

But Mr. Crow shook his head. "It couldn't have been that," he said.

"Maybe Mrs. Green is rocking on a loose board on the porch," Jasper
suggested.

Still Mr. Crow couldn't agree with him.

"Don't be silly!" he snapped. "We're half a mile from the farmhouse."

"Well, what do _you_ think the noise was?" Jasper Jay inquired.

Old Mr. Crow cocked an eye upward into the tree-top above him. "I'd
think it was a Squirrel if it was louder," he replied. Jasper Jay
laughed in a most disagreeable fashion.

"I'd think it was thunder if it was loud enough," he sneered.

And at that the two cousins began to quarrel violently. To tell the
truth, they never could be together long without having a dispute.

For a short time Dickie Deer Mouse listened to their rude remarks,
hoping that they would stop wrangling long enough to hear his question
about Fatty Coon.

But they talked louder and louder. And since Dickie Deer Mouse never
quarreled with anybody, and hated to hear such language as the two
cousins used, he slipped out of his house without their seeing him and
went over to the cornfield.

For he was hungry.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

VIII

IN THE CORNFIELD


In one way, especially, Fatty Coon and Dickie Deer Mouse were alike:
They were night-prowlers. When they slept it was usually broad daylight
outside, and the birds--except for a few odd fellows like Willie
Whip-poor-will and Mr. Night Hawk--were abroad, and singing, and
twittering. And when most of the birds went to sleep Dickie and Fatty
Coon began to feel quite wide awake.

It was not strange, therefore, that Dickie Deer Mouse was surprised when
he found himself face to face with Fatty Coon in the cornfield at
midday.

Dickie tried to slip out of sight under a pumpkin vine that grew between
the rows; but Fatty Coon saw him before he could hide. And Fatty began
to make the queerest noise, as if he were almost choking.

Dickie Deer Mouse stopped. And he trembled the least bit; for Fatty
looked terribly fierce. Perhaps (Dickie thought) he was choking with
rage.

"Can I help you?" Dickie asked him. "Would you like me to thump you on
the back?"

Fatty Coon shook his head. There was nothing the matter with him, except
that he had stuffed his mouth so full that he couldn't speak. After
swallowing several times he wiped his mouth on the back of his paw--a
habit of which his mother had never been able to break him. It was no
wonder that dainty Dickie Deer Mouse shuddered again, when Fatty did
that.

"May I go and get you a napkin?" Dickie asked, as he edged away.

"No!" Fatty Coon growled. "I've been wanting to have a talk with you.
And now that I've found you, you needn't run off."

Then, to Dickie's horror, Fatty stopped talking and licked both his
paws.

"May I get you a finger bowl?" Dickie inquired.

Fatty Coon actually didn't know what he meant.

"Is that something to eat?" he asked. And he looked much interested, and
seemed quite downcast when Dickie said "No!"

"Then you needn't trouble yourself," Fatty Coon told him with a sigh.

"Can't you find corn enough for a good meal?" Dickie asked him
wonderingly.

"I could," said Fatty Coon, "if other people didn't take so much of
it.... Now, there's Mr. Crow," he complained. "I had to get out of bed
and come over here to-day, in the sunlight, because I was afraid he
wouldn't leave any corn for me.

"There's no use saying anything to him," Fatty continued, "because he
thinks this is _his_ cornfield.... But little chaps like you will have
to keep away from this place.... Now I've warned you," he added. "And if
I hear of your eating any more corn I'll come straight to your
house--when I find out where it is--and I'll----"

He did not finish his threat. But he looked so darkly at Dickie that
what he _didn't_ say made Dickie Deer Mouse shiver all over, though the
warm midday sun fell upon the cornfield.

Now, Dickie Deer Mouse hadn't eaten a single kernel of corn all that
day. But he suddenly lost his appetite for it; and murmuring a faint
good-bye he turned and ran for the woods as fast as he could go.

"Stop! Stop!" Fatty Coon called after him. "There's something more I
want to say to you."

But whatever it may have been, Dickie Deer Mouse did not wait to hear
it.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

IX

FATTY COON NEEDS HELP


The moment he plunged into the woods beyond the cornfield Dickie Deer
Mouse began to feel better. He knew that Fatty Coon would not leave that
place of plenty until he had filled himself almost to bursting with
tender young corn.

After Dickie had eaten a few seeds that he found under the trees, as
well as a plump bug that was hiding beneath a log, he actually told
himself that he was glad he had met Fatty Coon in the cornfield.

"Now that he has talked with me," Dickie reasoned, "he won't trouble
himself to come to my house when old Mr. Crow tells him where I live."

That thought was a great comfort to him. Ever since he had waked up and
heard Mr. Crow and Jasper Jay talking outside his house he had felt most
uneasy. If Mr. Crow was going to guide Fatty Coon to his new home,
Dickie hardly thought it safe to stay there any longer.

But now he was sure that that danger was past. Fatty had given him his
warning. And Dickie had no doubt that so long as he kept away from the
corn his greedy neighbor would never bother to disturb him.

So instead of quitting his snug home--as he had feared he must--he went
back to it to finish his nap.

Now, Dickie Deer Mouse had lost so much sleep--through being disturbed
by Mr. Crow and Jasper Jay--that when night came he kept right on
sleeping. Yes! Instead of joining his friends in a mad scamper through
the woods in the moonlight, Dickie Deer Mouse slept on and on and on,
until--something shook the small tree where he lived and made it sway as
if an earthquake had come.

Dickie Deer Mouse roused himself with a start. His sharp ears caught a
scratching sound. And sticking his head through his doorway, he looked
out.

One quick glance told him what was happening. That pudgy rascal, Fatty
Coon, was climbing the tree! And every moment brought him nearer and
nearer to Dickie's house.

Dickie's big, black eyes bulged more than ever as he whisked out of his
house and scampered to the top of the tree, where the branches were so
small that Fatty Coon could never follow him.

"Stop!" Fatty Coon cried. "Mr. Crow told me where I could find you. And
I want to have a word with you."

"What sort of word?" Dickie Deer Mouse inquired.

"It's about the cornfield," Fatty Coon explained.

"I haven't been near that place since you last saw me there," Dickie
declared.

"I know you haven't," Fatty told him. "That's just why I want to have a
word with you. I'm in a peck of trouble. And I want you to help me."

Dickie Deer Mouse could scarcely believe it. But being a very polite
young gentleman, he told Fatty that he would be glad to do anything in
his power to assist him--or at least, anything except to come down out
of the top of the tree.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

X

A BIT OF ADVICE


"It's like this," Fatty Coon said, puffing a bit--on account of his
climb--as he looked up at Dickie Deer Mouse. "Old Mr. Crow says that
Farmer Green is going to sick old dog Spot on me if I don't keep out of
the cornfield."

"Well, I should say it was very kind of Mr. Crow to tell you," Dickie
remarked.

Fatty Coon was not so sure of that.

"He'd like to have the cornfield to himself," he told Dickie. "He'd like
nothing better than to keep me out of it. And if old dog Spot is coming
there after me, I certainly don't want to go near the place again."

"Then I'd stay away, if I were you," Dickie Deer Mouse told him.

"Ah! That's just the trouble!" Fatty Coon cried. "I can't! I'm too fond
of corn. And that's why I've come here to have a word with you," he went
on. "I've noticed that you haven't set foot in the cornfield since I
spoke to you over there in the middle of the day. And I want you to tell
me how you manage to stay away."

"Something seems to pull me right away from it," Dickie Deer Mouse told
him.

Fatty Coon groaned.

"Something seems to pull me _towards_ the corn!" he wailed.

Dickie Deer Mouse couldn't help feeling sorry for him.

"If there was only something else that you liked better than green
corn," he said, "perhaps it would help you to keep away from this new
danger."

"But there isn't!" Fatty Coon exclaimed.

"Have you ever tried _horns_?" Dickie Deer Mouse asked him.

Fatty Coon looked puzzled.

"What kind?" he asked his small friend.

"Deer's!" Dickie explained. "You know they drop them in the woods
sometimes. I've had many a meal off deer's horns. And I can say
truthfully that there's nothing quite like them when you're hungry."

Fatty Coon actually began to look hopeful.

"I'm always hungry," he announced. "And perhaps if I could get a taste
of deer's horns they would keep my mind off the cornfield. Where did
you say I could find some?"

"I didn't say," Dickie Deer Mouse reminded him; "but I don't object to
telling you where to look. They're generally to be found in the woods,
near the foot of a tree."

Fatty Coon's face brightened at once.

"Then it ought to be easy for me to get a taste of some," he cried. And
he began to crawl down the tree even as he spoke.

He did not thank Dickie Deer Mouse for his help. But that was like
Fatty. Always having his mind on eatables, he was more than likely to
forget to be polite.

Little Dickie Deer Mouse smiled as he watched the actions of his late
caller. The instant Fatty Coon reached the ground he began to look
under the trees--first one and then another.

"Don't miss a single tree!" Dickie called to him.

"Don't worry!" Fatty Coon replied. "I'm going to keep looking until I
find some deer's horns. And I hope I'll like 'em when I find 'em, for
I'm terribly hungry right now."

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

XI

A SEARCH IN VAIN


It was true that Dickie Deer Mouse and all his relations feasted on the
horns shed by the deer. But of course they didn't find horns in the
woods every day. Only at a certain season of the year did the deer drop
them. And since that time was now past, and the Deer Mouse family had
scoured the woods until they found--and devoured--them all, it is clear
that Fatty Coon had started out on a fruitless hunt.

But he didn't know that, even if Dickie Deer Mouse did. And that was the
reason why Dickie smiled as he watched Fatty Coon dodging about among
the trees, looking for deer's horns where there couldn't possibly be
any.

"It's the finest thing that could happen to Fatty," Dickie Deer Mouse
thought. "While he's hunting for horns he can't go to the cornfield. And
so long as he stays away from the cornfield, old dog Spot can't catch
him there."

And then Dickie set forth to find his friends and enjoy a romp in the
moonlight.

Dawn found him creeping into his house once more. And after what had
happened during the night it was not strange that he should dream about
Fatty Coon.

It was not a pleasant dream. For some reason or other Fatty Coon seemed
to be angry with him, and was shouting in a terrible, deep voice,
"Where's Dickie Deer Mouse? Where's Dickie Deer Mouse?"

And then Dickie awoke, all a-shiver. But of course he felt better at
once, for he knew that it was only a dream. And he stretched himself,
and buried his head in his bed of cat-tail down, because the daylight
was trickling in through his doorway.

"_Where's Dickie Deer Mouse?_" Again that question startled him, though
he was wide awake, and couldn't be dreaming.

The next instant Dickie's tree began to quiver. Fatty Coon was climbing
up it! And Dickie Deer Mouse jumped out of bed in a hurry and slipped
out of his door.

Looking down, he could see that Fatty Coon was in something quite like a
rage.

"What's the matter?" Dickie called to him.

Fatty could do nothing but glare and growl at him.

"Have you had your breakfast?" Dickie asked him.

Fatty shook his head.

"No!" he roared. "I haven't had a morsel to eat since I last saw you.
I've been hunting for horns all this time. And I've come back to tell
you that I don't like your advice. If I followed it much longer there's
no doubt that I'd starve to death."

"It has kept you out of the cornfield, hasn't it?" Dickie inquired.

"Yes!" Fatty admitted. "But it won't much longer. I'm on my way to the
cornfield now." He looked at Dickie and frowned, as if to say, "Just try
to stop me!"

"Aren't you afraid to go there?" Dickie asked him.

Fatty Coon sniffed.

"That story about old dog Spot was nothing but a trick," he declared.
"It was just a trick of old Mr. Crow's. He wants all the corn himself."

"Don't you think, then, that you and I ought to eat all the corn we
can?" Dickie inquired.

"I certainly do!" Fatty Coon replied. "Let's hurry over now and get
some!"

Dickie Deer Mouse was only too glad to accept the invitation. And he
waited politely until Fatty had reached the ground, before going down
himself.

Old Mr. Crow saw them the moment they entered the cornfield. And he
hurried up to them with a most important air and advised them both that
they "had come to a dangerous place."

[Illustration: "Where's Dickie Deer Mouse?"]

Fatty Coon paid no attention to the old gentleman.

But Dickie Deer Mouse thanked Mr. Crow and told him that after he had
had all the corn he wanted he was going back to the woods.

Noticing that the old gentleman seemed peevish about something, Dickie
said to him:

"There ought to be enough for all."

But still Mr. Crow looked glum.

"There's enough for them that don't care for much else," he muttered.
"But we can't feed the whole world on this corn, you know.... How would
you like it if I took to eating deer's horns--when they're in season, of
course?"

"You can have all the deer's horns you want," Fatty Coon remarked
thickly--for already his mouth was full.

And being very polite, Dickie Deer Mouse said the same thing; though of
course he waited until he could speak distinctly.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

XII

A LITTLE SURPRISE


Simon Screecher lived in the apple orchard, in a hollow tree, where he
could sleep during the day safe from attack by mobs of small birds, who
had the best of reasons for disliking him.

By night Simon wandered about the fields and the woods, hunting for mice
and insects. And since night was the time when Dickie Deer Mouse was
awake, and up and doing, it would have been a wonder if the two had
never met.

One thing is certain: Dickie Deer Mouse was not eager to make Simon
Screecher's acquaintance. Whenever he heard Simon's call he stopped and
listened. If it sounded nearer the next time it reached his ears, Dickie
Deer Mouse promptly hid himself in any good place that was handy.

So matters went along for some time. And Dickie actually began to think
that perhaps he didn't need to be so careful, and that maybe Simon
Screecher was not so bad as people said.

However, he jumped almost out of his skin one night, when he heard a
wailing whistle in a tree right over his head. And when he came down
upon all-fours again he couldn't see a single place to hide.

So he stood stock still, hardly daring to breathe.

To Dickie's dismay, a mocking laugh rang out. And somebody said:

"I see you!"

It was Simon Screecher himself that spoke.

Dickie Deer Mouse looked up and spied him, sitting on a low limb. He was
not so big as Dickie had supposed. But it was certainly Simon. Dickie
knew him, beyond a doubt, by his ear-tufts, which stuck up from his head
like horns.

"What made you jump when I whistled?" Simon Screecher asked him.

"I don't know," Dickie answered, "unless it was you."

Simon Screecher chuckled.

"You're a bright young chap," he observed. "But that's not surprising,
for I notice that you belong to the Deer Mouse family, and everybody's
aware that they are one of the brightest families in Pleasant
Valley--_what are left of them_."

These last words made Dickie Deer Mouse more uneasy than ever. But he
made up his mind not to let Simon Screecher know that he was worried.

"I have a great many relations," he declared stoutly. "Ours is a big
family."

"Yes--but not nearly so big as it was when I first came to this
neighborhood to live," Simon told him with a sly smile.

He had hardly finished that remark when a loud _wha-wha, whoo-ah_ came
from a hemlock not far away. And the next moment Simon's cousin Solomon
Owl sailed through the moonlight and alighted near him.

Dickie Deer Mouse couldn't help thinking that it was a great night for
the Owl family. And he was surprised to notice that Simon Screecher did
not act overjoyed at seeing his cousin.

"It's a pleasant night," said Solomon Owl in his deep, hollow voice.

Simon Screecher replied somewhat sourly that he supposed it was. And he
changed his seat, so that he might keep his eyes on both his cousin and
Dickie Deer Mouse at the same time.

But Solomon Owl made matters very hard for Simon. Simon had no sooner
seated himself comfortably when Solomon Owl moved to a perch behind him.

Simon Screecher looked almost crosseyed, as he tried to watch everything
that happened. And he looked so fretful that for a moment Dickie Deer
Mouse actually forgot his fear and laughed aloud. [Illustration]




[Illustration]

XIII

THE FEATHERS FLY


"I'm glad to see you," Solomon Owl told his cousin Simon Screecher,
while Dickie Deer Mouse stood stock still on the ground beneath the tree
where the two cousins were sitting. "I'm glad to see you. And I hope
you're enjoying good health."

"I'm well enough," Simon Screecher grunted.

"Do you find plenty to eat nowadays?" Solomon asked him.

Simon Screecher admitted that he was not starving.

"Ah!" Solomon exclaimed. "Then you can have no objection to sharing a
specially nice tidbit with your own cousin."

Dickie Deer Mouse shivered. But he did not dare move, with one of Simon
Screecher's great, glassy eyes staring straight at him. And there was
something else that did not help to put him at his ease: Solomon Owl
seemed to be watching him likewise!

"Haven't you dined to-night?" Simon Screecher inquired in a testy tone.

"Yes!" Solomon admitted. "But I haven't had my dessert yet.... What are
you looking at so closely, Cousin Simon, down there on the ground?"

An angry light came into Simon Screecher's eyes.

"Can't I look where I please?" he snapped.

And he changed his seat again, so that he might get a better view of
Dickie and Solomon at the same time.

Solomon Owl promptly moved to another limb behind Simon, and slightly
higher.

And Dickie Deer Mouse took heart when Simon Screecher began to make a
queer sound by opening his beak and shutting it with a snap, as if he
would like to nip somebody.

Dickie knew that Simon Screecher was in a terrible rage. And unless his
threatening actions scared Solomon Owl away, Dickie thought there was
likely to be a cousinly fight.

He was pleased to notice that Solomon Owl showed no sign of dismay.
There was really no reason why he should. He was much bigger than his
peppery cousin. And he looked at Simon in a calm and unruffled fashion
that seemed to make that quarrelsome fellow angrier than ever.

"What's the matter?" Solomon Owl asked Simon Screecher. "If you had any
teeth I'd think they were chattering.... Are you having a chill?"

Simon made no answer.

"Maybe you're afraid of something," Solomon Owl suggested. "Can it be
that young Deer Mouse down there on the ground?" And he laughed loudly
at what _he_ thought was a joke.

"That's _my_ Deer Mouse!" Simon Screecher squalled, suddenly finding his
voice. "I saw him first. And he's my prize."

"He looks to me like the one I lost a few nights ago," Solomon Owl
announced solemnly. "In that case, of course I saw him first. So you'd
better fly home to your old apple tree in the orchard."

"I'll do nothing of the sort!" Simon Screecher declared; and his voice
rose to a shrill quaver.

Turning swiftly, he flew straight at his cousin. And then how the
feathers did fly!

Dickie Deer Mouse wanted to stay right there, for he hated to miss any
of the fun. But he remembered that he was a "tidbit"; so he scampered
away through the woods. And though he never knew how the fight ended, he
was sure of one thing: There was no prize for the winner.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

XIV

MAKING READY FOR WINTER


After his escape from Solomon Owl and Simon Screecher, Dickie Deer Mouse
never felt quite so care-free as he always had before, when wandering
through the woods at night. And he never stayed inside his house after
dark without wondering whether Solomon or Simon could by any chance
discover his snug home in the last year's bird's nest. It was not a
pleasant thought. And the oftener it popped into Dickie's head the less
he liked it.

Sometimes, when summer had ended and fall brought a night that was
rainy and cold, he liked to go home after he had finished his supper,
and burrow deep into his soft bed of cat-tail down.

But even after he had dried his wet coat and warmed himself well, at
such times Dickie Deer Mouse started whenever he heard the slightest
noise. Somehow, he couldn't get the Owl family out of his mind.

As the days grew shorter--and the nights longer--he began to find that
his summer home was not so cozy as it might have been.

The cold wind searched him out, even under his soft covering; and the
driving rains trickled annoyingly through his roof of moss.

So at last Dickie Deer Mouse made up his mind that he would move once
more. And since he was not the sort to put off the doing of anything
that had to be done, he set out at once to see what kind of place he
could find.

Now, Dickie Deer Mouse liked the woods in which he had always lived. So
one might think it strange that when he set forth on his search he
headed straight for Farmer Green's pasture. But there is no doubt that
he knew what he was about.

For some time he crept cautiously about the pasture, peeping under big
rocks, and moving among the roots of the trees which dotted the hillside
here and there. And since his eyes were of the sharpest, what he was
looking for he found in surprising numbers.

Most people, strolling through the pasture, would have noticed little
except grass and bushes, trees and rocks and knolls. But those were not
the things that Dickie Deer Mouse discovered, and sniffed at. What he
was hunting for was _holes_.

For Dickie had decided that when winter came, with its ice and snow, its
cruel gales and its piercing cold, he would be far more comfortable
underground than he could ever hope to be in a last year's bird's nest
that was fastened to a tree.

He had found it no easy matter to pick out a summer home. And now there
were reasons why his search for a winter one was even harder.

It is true that at the beginning of summer, when Dickie Deer Mouse
climbed the tall elm where Mr. Crow lived, he found the old gentleman
asleep in the nest that he had hoped to take for his own. But on the
whole it was easy to discover whether a nest was deserted.

One look into it usually told the story. Eggs in a bird's nest meant
that somebody must live there. And of course if Dickie saw a bird
sitting on a nest he knew right away that he couldn't live there without
having a fight first.

But a _hole_ is different. One can't see what's at the bottom of it
without going inside it.

And that is not always a pleasant thing to do.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

XV

A PLUNGE IN THE DARK


There was one hole, especially, among those he found in Farmer Green's
pasture, from which Dickie Deer Mouse ran as fast as he could scamper.

This was a hole with a big front door, and plenty of fresh dirt
scattered around it, as if somebody had been digging there not long
before.

When Dickie first noticed the burrow he stopped short and stood quite
still, while he peeped at it out of a tangle of blackberry bushes.

Something told him that he had stumbled upon the home of a dangerous
person. And if the wind hadn't been blowing in his face, as he looked
towards the wide opening, he would not have dared stay there as long as
he did.

As he looked he suddenly saw a pair of eyes gleaming from the dark
cavern. And soon he beheld a long, pointed snout, which its owner thrust
outside in a gingerly manner.

That was enough for Dickie Deer Mouse.

He wheeled about and whisked up the nearest tree he could find. And
there he stayed for a long, long time, until he felt sure that it was
quite safe for him to venture down upon the ground again.

He had come upon Tommy Fox's burrow!

And if there was one hole in the ground into which he had no wish to
go, that was it. For Tommy Fox was no friend of his.

Since he didn't care for Tommy's company, Dickie went to the corner of
the pasture that was furthest from Tommy's home, to search once more for
such a hole as he hoped to find.

Almost nobody else ever would have discovered the one that Dickie picked
out at last as the best place of all in which to spend the winter. But
the bright eyes of Dickie Deer Mouse found a tiny opening, which he
carefully made just big enough to admit him.

It was the entrance to an old burrow where an aunt and an uncle of Billy
Woodchuck had once lived and raised a numerous family. When the children
had all grown up and gone away their parents had left that home for a
new one in the clover field. And somehow all the smaller field people
had overlooked it.

Little by little the frost had heaved the earth about the doorway, and
the wash of the rains had helped to fill it, and Farmer Green's cows had
trampled over it, and the grass had all but covered the small opening
that remained.

There were signs in plenty about the spot that told Dickie Deer Mouse
the burrow was deserted. Or perhaps it would be better to say that there
was no sign at all of any occupant. Dickie found not a trace of a path
nor even a foot-print near the hole nor did his nose discover the
faintest scent either of friend or enemy.

Slipping inside the hole, Dickie found himself in the mouth of a big,
airy tunnel, which went sharply downwards for a few feet.

And without the slightest fear he plunged down the dark hole, to see
what he could see.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

XVI

A LUCKY FIND


Though Dickie Deer Mouse was shy, he couldn't have been a coward. For
when he had reached the end of that first pitch that led into the old
burrow of Billy Woodchuck's uncle and aunt he never once thought of
turning back. Before him stretched a dark, dry, level tunnel. And
through it Dickie quickly made his way.

It was surprisingly long--that underground passage. But he came to the
end of it at last. And creeping upwards, because the tunnel rose
suddenly, Dickie Deer Mouse found himself in a roomy chamber,
comfortably furnished with a big bed of soft, dried grasses, where Mr.
and Mrs. Woodchuck had passed a good many hard winters asleep, while the
snow lay deep upon the ground above them.

It took Dickie Deer Mouse no longer than a jiffy to decide that he had
found the very place for which he had been looking. He knew that in that
secret chamber he had nothing to fear from Solomon Owl nor Simon
Screecher, nor Fatty Coon, either. And when midwinter came, and the
nights turned bitterly cold, he could cuddle down in that soft bed and
dream about summer, and warm, moonlit nights in the woods of the world
above.

It was no wonder that Dickie Deer Mouse was pleased. And for a time he
forgot everything but his good luck--until he remembered that he had had
nothing to eat since the night before.

So he made his way back through the long tunnel, and up into Farmer
Green's pasture. Then, looking around under the twinkling stars, he took
pains to see exactly where his new home was.

It certainly would have been a great mishap if he had gone away in such
a hurry that he could never have found his doorway again. But it was an
easy matter to fix the spot in his mind. When he came back he needed
only to follow along the rail fence until he came to the corner. Not far
from the fence corner, in the woods, stood Farmer Green's sugar house.
And about the same distance on the other side of the fence a lone
straggler of a maple tree stood on a knoll in the pasture. The departed
Mr. and Mrs. Woodchuck had been wise enough to dig the opening to their
burrow between the roots of the tree. They knew that if Tommy Fox tried
to dig them out of their underground home, he would find the passage
between the roots too small to squeeze through.

Dickie Deer Mouse smiled as he saw what the builders of his house had
done. They had made everything exactly to suit him. He knew that he
could have done no better himself; in fact he knew that he couldn't have
done nearly so well. For he was no digger. But he told himself that
there was no reason why he should feel sad about that, so long as others
were kind enough to dig a fine home and leave it for him to live in.

Then he slipped into the woods, feeling so happy that he had to stop and
relate his good fortune to the first person he met.

And that was where Dickie Deer Mouse made a slight mistake.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

XVII

A SLIGHT MISTAKE


Scarcely had Dickie Deer Mouse plunged into the woods when he met Fatty
Coon coming in the opposite direction.

"Hullo!" Fatty said, looking up at Dickie, who had scrambled into a tree
as soon as he caught sight of Fatty's plump form. "What have you been
doing in Farmer Green's pasture! I thought you always stayed in the
woods--unless you happened to go to the cornfield."

"I've been looking for a winter home," Dickie explained. "And I've just
found the finest one you ever saw."

"Where is it!" Fatty asked him. "I might want to pay you a call some
night--when I had nothing else to do."

Dickie Deer Mouse was in such a cheerful mood that almost anything Fatty
Coon might have said would have pleased him.

"My new house is just beyond the fence," Dickie explained. "But I'm
afraid you can't very well visit me there," he added with a smile.

"Why not?" Fatty Coon inquired. "I'm as good a climber as anybody. I can
climb the tallest tree you ever saw, without feeling dizzy. But of
course I'm a bit heavier than you are. And if you've gone and picked out
a nest that's a long way above the ground, among the smallest branches,
it might not be safe for me to go all the way up to it."

Dickie Deer Mouse had to smile once more.

[Illustration: Dickie escapes from Tommy Fox]

"My new home isn't as high as I am right now," he told Fatty Coon.

Fatty grunted.

"Then I'll certainly come to see you," he said, "when time hangs heavily
on my hands."

"My new house isn't as high as you are right now," Dickie remarked.

And at that Fatty Coon looked puzzled. His mouth fell open; and for a
few moments he stared at his small friend without saying a word.

"You must be mistaken," he replied at last. "I'm standing on the ground.
And I never saw a last year's bird's nest that was lower than that."

"I shall have to explain," said Dickie, "that my new home is much finer
than my old one. Now, you may not believe it, but it has a front hall
that's a hundred times as long as your tail."

Fatty Coon looked around at his ringed tail, with its black tip; and
then he looked up at Dickie Deer Mouse again.

"You must be mistaken!" he cried. "I'll have to take my tail to your
house and measure your front hall myself before I'll believe that."

"You can't measure my hall!" Dickie Deer Mouse exclaimed.

"Who's going to stop me?" Fatty Coon growled. He was used to having his
own way. And it always made him angry when anybody tried to upset his
plans. "I'm going to your house in the pasture now; and I'll soon show
you that you're mistaken about your front hall.... You come with me and
lead the way, young fellow!"

But Dickie Deer Mouse said he was so hungry that he couldn't go back
just then.

"I'm headed for the big beech tree to see if I can find a few nuts," he
announced.

At the mention of food Fatty Coon's face took on a different look.

"I'm hungry myself," he said, as if he had just remembered something. "I
was on my way to Farmer Green's corn house when I met you. And I really
ought to get there before the moon comes up. So if you'll tell me where
your house is I'll stop there when I come back."

"My new home----" Dickie Deer Mouse informed him with an air of great
pride----"my new home is in the burrow where Mr. and Mrs. Woodchuck used
to live. The front door is under the tree that stands on the knoll just
beyond the fence. But you can never get inside it, because you're
altogether too fat."

The stout person on the ground knew that he spoke the truth. And without
saying another word he turned about and disappeared in the direction of
the farm buildings.

"Don't forget to take your tail with you!" Dickie Deer Mouse called to
him, just before he was out of sight. "You might want to measure the
corn house."

But Fatty Coon did not trouble himself to answer.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

XVIII

TOO MANY COUSINS


In high spirits Dickie Deer Mouse hurried on through the woods until he
came to the big beech tree. And though many others had been there before
him, since the nuts had ripened, Dickie had such a sharp eye for a beech
nut that even though it was then night, he soon found enough for a
hearty meal.

Then he had to have a romp with a few gay fellows whom he met under the
beech tree. And so quickly did the time pass that before he knew it the
night had turned gray. Day was breaking. And shouting good-bye to his
friends Dickie Deer Mouse ran off towards Farmer Green's pasture. He
wanted a nap. And having nothing in his summer home that was worth
moving, he knew of no reason why he shouldn't begin at once to live in
his new quarters.

He never felt happier than he did as he scampered in and out among the
trees, slipped under the rail fence, and streaked across the short grass
of the pasture. But when he reached his doorway he stopped in dismay.

Where he had expected to see nobody at all, his eyes bulged with
surprise at the crowd that had gathered in his dooryard.

As soon as he had taken several good looks at the company, Dickie Deer
Mouse discovered that they were distant relations of his, of all ages
and sizes. And at last he succeeded in sorting them into families.

There were three big families. And no one in the whole crowd paid any
heed to Dickie Deer Mouse. They seemed to be talking about something
most important, and too busy to notice the newcomer.

If the truth were known, the sight of his second and third and fourth
cousins did not particularly please Dickie Deer Mouse. But he was an
agreeable young gentleman. So he stepped forward and called several of
his cousins by name. And since he couldn't say honestly that he was
delighted to see them, he told them how well they looked and said that
he hoped they had passed a happy summer.

"Here he is at last!" everybody cried. "We've been waiting for you for a
long time, because we weren't sure whether we'd found the right place."

"What place?" Dickie Deer Mouse asked them as he looked from one to
another in dismay.

"Why, the great house that you've found!" somebody cried. "We've heard
that it has a front hall a hundred times as long as Fatty Coon's tail.
So of course there must be lots of rooms in it; and we've come to keep
you company and spend the winter."

When he heard that news Dickie Deer Mouse became almost faint. He did
not want to hurt his cousins' feelings. But his plan of spending the
winter quietly hardly made him welcome the idea of having a dozen
half-grown children in his home.

"Who told you about my house?" he demanded with just a trace of
disappointment.

"It was Fatty Coon," several of his cousins explained at once.

And then Dickie Deer Mouse knew that he had made a mistake when he told
Fatty of his good fortune.

"I'm sorry to say that he has misled you," Dickie informed his
relations. "It's true that my front hall is very long. But the trouble
is, there's only one chamber."

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

XIX

THE WRONG TURN


For a few moments Dickie Deer Mouse's cousins looked terribly
disappointed. He had told them that his new house had only one chamber.
And each of the three big families had expected to have at least one
bedroom.

The elder cousins gathered in a group and talked in low tones. Dickie
could not hear what they said. He hoped that they were going to bid him
farewell and go back where they came from. But he soon saw that they had
no such idea.

The eldest of all, whom Dickie knew as Cousin Dan'l, said to him
presently:

"Cheer up! We know you'd be sorry not to have us with you during the
winter. So we'll take a look at your chamber. Perhaps it's big enough
for all of us."

Dickie tried to tell Cousin Dan'l Deer Mouse that he was afraid the
chamber would be too crowded with so many in it. But when he opened his
mouth the words, somehow, would not come. And at last he nodded his head
and crept through his doorway, while his cousins followed him one by
one.

The younger cousins pushed and crowded and quarreled, making such a
commotion that Dickie Deer Mouse could hear them plainly, though he was
some distance ahead of them.

"Those youngsters will have to keep still," he said over his shoulder to
the cousin that was nearest him.

Everybody passed the message down the line. And when the youngsters
heard it they began to laugh.

"Tell Cousin Dickie to stop us if he can," they shouted.

Their rude answer reached Dickie Deer Mouse just as he came to a place
in his front hall to which he had paid little heed before. Right at the
spot where he stood the tunnel divided itself into two passages. Before,
he had taken the one on the right. But now something told him to go the
other way. So he turned to the left, still followed closely by the
cousin that was behind him.

The whole procession came trailing after them. And the first thing
Dickie--or anybody else--knew, they all found themselves standing in the
grassy pasture once more, in the gray light of the morning.

They had passed out through the back door of the house, without entering
the chamber at all!

As soon as Dickie's relations saw where they were they looked at one
another in a puzzled fashion.

"What's the matter?" Cousin Dan'l demanded of Dickie. "I followed the
crowd. But I saw no chamber anywhere."

Dickie Deer Mouse didn't know exactly what to say. So he merely shook
his head, hoping that the company would go away.

"Can it be possible that you've lost your bedroom?" Cousin Dan'l Deer
Mouse asked him. "Is it so small that you could have overlooked it?"

"The bedroom's none too big," Dickie replied.

"Then maybe we passed through it without noticing it," his elderly
cousin observed.

"We can't stand around here in the pasture all day, Dan'l," the cousin's
wife complained. "If Mr. Hawk happened to come this way he'd be sure to
see us."

"What do you suggest?" Cousin Dan'l asked Dickie Deer Mouse. "You see
the women are nervous." And he cocked an eye up at the sky, as if he did
not feel any too safe himself when he thought of Mr. Hawk.

"It seems to me," Dickie told him, "that we'd all of us better go back
to our summer homes."

And then, after saying that he hoped everybody would get home without an
accident, and wouldn't meet Mr. Hawk, Dickie Deer Mouse turned towards
the woods and hurried away.

His parting words did not make his numerous cousins feel any happier.
And since they wanted to get out of sight as soon as they could, they
quickly followed Dickie's example and scurried off as fast as they could
go, to spend another day in the summer houses in which they had been
living.

Now, Dickie Deer Mouse had paused as soon as he had reached the rail
fence at the edge of the woods. And unseen by his cousins he peeped back
to find out what they might do.

When the three families scattered in three different directions Dickie
Deer Mouse believed that he was well rid of them.

But by that time it had grown so light that he did not want to show
himself in the pasture, not even long enough to scamper the short
distance from the fence back to the front door of his new house.

So he passed another day in the last year's bird's nest.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

XX

BEDFELLOWS


During his rambles on the following night Dickie Deer Mouse took great
care to keep out of sight of the three families of cousins that had
tried to quarter themselves in his new house in the pasture. Moreover he
said nothing to anybody about his future home. Fatty Coon had taught him
in one lesson that it is sometimes wise to keep a secret.

The night was not ended when Dickie sought the burrow in the pasture
once more. He hardly dared hope, as he neared the dooryard, that he
would not find a crowd waiting there again. But when he reached his
doorway he saw not a soul anywhere around.

He felt happy beyond words. And he popped through his doorway, hurried
through the hall--which was a hundred times as long as Fatty Coon's
tail--and burst into the cozy chamber.

Dickie had hardly entered the room when he stumbled over something soft.
And a voice that sounded exactly like Cousin Dan'l's called out in
rather a peevish tone that he'd better look out where he stepped.

"Who's here?" Dickie asked in a faint whisper.

"We are!" the voice replied. "There are eighteen of us in all. And you'd
better be careful not to trample on anybody."

Dickie's heart sank. He understood, in a flash, what had happened. The
three families of cousins were all there, sleeping in his soft bed of
dried grasses! They had come back to the house in the pasture ahead of
him, and had found the chamber without his help.

At first he almost turned around and left that place forever, without
saying another word. But the night had turned cold and a drizzling rain
was falling. And he knew that the roof of his summer home must be
leaking badly. That underground chamber was delightfully dry and warm.
And if the twelve children didn't wake up and begin to cry he saw no
reason why he shouldn't spend one night there, anyway.

So he felt his way carefully about the room. There was no denying that
it was dreadfully crowded. But at last Dickie Deer Mouse found a vacant
spot that was big enough to lie upon. And burrowing down into the bed
of grasses he soon fell asleep.

When Dickie Deer Mouse awoke, after his first sleep in the underground
chamber, he thought that summer had come. He hadn't felt so comfortable
for weeks. And for a little time he lay quite still, half dozing,
enjoying the delightful warmth.

And then all at once he came to his senses. He remembered that he was in
the burrow where Mr. and Mrs. Woodchuck had lived, in Farmer Green's
pasture. And he recalled unpleasantly the misfortune that had happened:
he had been forced to share his snug bedroom with eighteen of his
distant cousins.

They were still sleeping soundly all around him. And Dickie Deer Mouse
made a strange wish.

"They're here," he said to himself. "And I don't know of any way to get
rid of them. I only wish they wouldn't wake up till spring."

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

XXI

ONE WAY TO KEEP WARM


After making his strange wish about his eighteen cousins--that they
would sleep straight through the winter--Dickie Deer Mouse crawled out
of bed. The sleepers filled the chamber so full that Dickie had to step
into the hall before he could stretch himself.

For some reason he seemed to feel unusually _stretchy_. Generally when
he waked up he sprang up at once and dashed out of his house, to find
something to eat. But now he had half a mind to go back to bed again.

He did not do that, however, because he wanted to get away from his
unwelcome guests for a time. So he crept through his long hall and
crawled out through his front door, into the world above.

To Dickie's great surprise a startling change had come over the pasture.
The weather had cleared while he slept and the stars twinkled in the
heavens above him. And the hillside pasture was white with a thick
blanket of snow.

It was cold, too--much colder than it had been when Dickie went to
sleep.

Luckily a crust had formed upon the snow--a crust that was just strong
enough to support Dickie's weight. And he made swiftly for the spruce
woods, to hunt for his supper, for he knew he could find nothing on the
ground, covered as it was by the snow.

Dickie felt even hungrier than he usually did when starting out of an
evening to look for something to eat. But that was not strange, for
without knowing it, he had slept several days and nights in the snug
chamber with his cousins.

Dickie did not stay out all night long. Yet he took time, before he went
home, to hide a small store of spruce seeds in a hollow rail of the
pasture fence. He knew that before the long winter came to an end he
would find that food in the woods would grow alarmingly scarce.

Long before daybreak Dickie Deer Mouse was glad to return to the
underground chamber. And as he crept into the crowded room he thought it
the coziest home he had ever had. He knew, at last, what made the place
so warm. The soft, round bodies of his eighteen cousins heated it almost
as well as if he had had a real stove.

It was lucky for him, after all, that Fatty Coon had told them about
Dickie's new house. And now Dickie only hoped that none of them would
leave before spring.

That snowstorm proved to be only the first warning of winter. In a few
days the weather grew quite warm again. And to Dickie's dismay the three
families of cousins waked up and went out of doors to get the air, and
gather seeds and such thin-shelled nuts as they could find.

They did not eat all that they picked up. Like Dickie Deer Mouse, they
stored some of the food in secret nooks and crannies, against a time of
need.

That first early snowstorm had been a good thing for the dwellers in the
underground chamber. It had warned them that winter was coming. And
during the weeks that passed before the whole countryside became
snow-bound they managed to gather enough nuts and seeds to last them
through any ordinary winter--if they didn't eat too heartily.

When the real winter finally descended upon Pleasant Valley it found the
Deer Mouse cousins quite ready for it. And even if Dickie's relations
did wake up now and then, when the weather wasn't too cold, they slept
soundly enough at other times, so that they did not disturb him greatly.

Even the children, who had pushed and crowded when they first entered
the front hall of the house--even they were surprisingly quiet, when
they were asleep.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

XXII

QUEER MR. PINE FINCH


Perhaps the winter was longer than usual; or perhaps Dickie Deer Mouse
ate too freely of his hidden store of good things. At any rate, Dickie's
hoard slowly grew smaller and smaller. And long before the day came when
he bolted the last seed that remained in the hollow fence-rail he had
begun to wonder where he should find more food.

While he had been sleeping the birds that stayed in Pleasant Valley
during the winter had been feasting greedily upon the very kind of fare
that Dickie Deer Mouse needed. Jasper Jay and his noisy cronies had
taken good care that there shouldn't be a beechnut left. And when they
had eaten the last sweet nut they turned to such dried berries as still
clung to the withered stocks on which they had grown.

No longer could Dickie Deer Mouse spend so much time asleep in his cozy
chamber. Instead, he had to wander far through the woods at night,
thankful to pick up a bit here and there as best he might.

On those crisp, cold nights he had to scamper fast in order to keep
warm. And often, when dawn came, he crept home still hungry.

At last Dickie's night runs lapped well over into the day. For his
search for food became more and more disappointing. And afterward he
often wondered what would have happened to him if he hadn't met Mr.
Pine Finch early one morning.

Mr. Pine Finch was an odd fellow. He had a peculiar way of talking as if
he spoke through his nose. Though Dickie Deer Mouse had seen him before,
he had paid scant attention to Mr. Pine Finch. But when he caught sight
of him on a certain chilly morning there were so few birds stirring that
Dickie stopped short and watched Mr. Pine Finch, who was so busy in a
tree-top that he didn't know anybody else was near him.

He was talking to himself. And as nearly as Dickie Deer Mouse could
tell, he was remarking--through his nose--that he was having a good
breakfast.

That news made Dickie Deer Mouse prick up his big ears. A good breakfast
was something that he had not enjoyed for a long, long time.

At first Dickie couldn't quite see what Mr. Pine Finch was about. It was
he, beyond a doubt. There could be no more mistaking his odd voice than
his plump, black-streaked back, with its splashes of yellow at the base
of his tail, and his yellow-edged wings. Dickie had a good view of Mr.
Pine-Finch's back, because its owner hung upside down from the tips of
the branches of the tree where Dickie spied him.

To Dickie Deer Mouse the sight, at first, was somewhat of a puzzle. He
stood quite still, gazing upward in wonder. And then all at once he
discovered what Mr. Pine Finch was doing. Something struck Dickie Deer
Mouse lightly on his back--something that made him jump.

He looked all around to see what had hit him. And there, on the snow
beside him, lay a bud off the tree above him.

Then Dickie Deer Mouse understood what Mr. Pine Finch was about. He was
eating the buds that clung to the tips of the branches.

Dickie Deer Mouse quickly ate that bud; and then he waited, watching
eagerly every move that Mr. Pine Finch made.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

XXIII

A FEAST AT LAST


To Dickie Deer Mouse, waiting impatiently for Mr. Pine Finch to drop
another bud out of the tree-top, it began to seem as if his good luck
were short lived. Could it be possible that Mr. Pine Finch was so
careful that he lost a bud only once in a long time--perhaps only once a
year?

But as Dickie Deer Mouse wondered, a small shower of buds came rattling
down upon the snow-crust. And Dickie Deer Mouse snatched them up, every
one, and ate them hungrily.

In a little while he felt so much better that he called out to Mr. Pine
Finch:

"Shake a lot of 'em down--there's a good fellow!"

Mr. Pine Finch fluttered to a perch on a limb and looked down in great
surprise.

"Did you speak?" he inquired.

"Yes!" Dickie Deer Mouse piped up. "You know, I can climb a tree; but I
can't crawl out to the tips of the branches, because I'm too heavy. So
you'll oblige me if you'll drop a few dozen more of those buds."

The request surprised Mr. Pine Finch. His face told that much.

"_Buds!_" he exclaimed. "Why do you want _buds_?"

"I eat them--when I can get them," Dickie Deer Mouse informed him.

The streaked gentleman in the tree looked quite blank.

"What a strange thing to do!" he cried through his nose--or so it
seemed.

"Strange!" Dickie Deer Mouse echoed. "Why, you've just been eating some
yourself!" And he couldn't help thinking that Mr. Pine Finch was even
odder than he sounded.

"That's so," Mr. Pine Finch admitted. "In fact, I may say that I'm very,
very fond of tree-buds. But I'm a bird. And of course everybody knows
that you're a rodent."

"I'm hungry, anyway," Dickie Deer Mouse retorted. He didn't mind Mr.
Finch's calling him names, if only he would drop some more buds.

"You're hungry, eh?" the odd gentleman in the tree replied. "That
reminds me that I'm still hungry myself. So I can't stop to talk with
you any longer just now."

Then he turned himself upside down, as he picked out a promising
cluster of buds. And before he had finished his breakfast he had dropped
so many buds that Dickie Deer Mouse called to him and thanked him for
his kindness.

"What! Are you still there?" Mr. Pine Finch exclaimed, gazing down at
Dickie as if he were greatly surprised to see him lingering beneath the
tree. "I must go away now," Mr. Pine Finch added. "But I'll make this
remark before I leave: If you have anything more to say to me, you can
find me here almost any morning soon after daybreak." And then he flew
off.

Dickie Deer Mouse told himself that he was in luck. By coming to that
spot early every day he could pick up buds enough--dropped carelessly by
Mr. Pine Finch--to feed himself until spring came and the snow melted
and uncovered the ground, where he knew he could find food.

So he went home and slept as he had not slept for weeks. And the next
morning, when he went back to the tree where he had found Mr. Pine
Finch, his eighteen cousins followed him. For Dickie Deer Mouse told
them of his good fortune and asked them to share it with him.

As for Mr. Pine Finch, he looked queerer than ever when he saw that
Dickie had brought eighteen of his relations with him. However, he bade
them all good morning. And he seemed to be even clumsier than he had
been the day before. He dropped an enormous number of buds; so many, in
fact, that Dickie Deer Mouse wondered how Mr. Pine Finch managed to get
enough breakfast for himself.

Perhaps that odd gentleman knew what he was about. To tell the truth,
he had noticed the day before that Dickie Deer Mouse looked thin and
hungry. His coat, too, struck Mr. Pine Finch as being somewhat shabby.
But he said nothing to show Dickie Deer Mouse that he knew there was
anything wrong. And if he dropped tree-buds on purpose, he never let
anyone know it.

Anyhow, Mr. Pine Finch did not fail to appear at that tree a single
morning during the rest of the winter. Before spring came the Deer Mouse
family had long since decided that he was the best friend they had in
all Pleasant Valley. And they all agreed that his voice, although he did
talk through his nose, was the pleasantest they had ever heard.

At last the breakfast parties beneath Mr. Pine Finch's favorite tree
came to an end. The snow vanished. Warm weather made the underground
chamber in Farmer Green's pasture seem crowded and stuffy. And Dickie
Deer Mouse said farewell to his eighteen cousins, because he wanted to
look for a pleasant place in which to spend the summer.

THE END

[Illustration]






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Tale of Dickie Deer Mouse, by 
Arthur Scott Bailey

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALE OF DICKIE DEER MOUSE ***

***** This file should be named 18953.txt or 18953.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/9/5/18953/

Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
