Project Gutenberg's The Tale of Sandy Chipmunk, by Arthur Scott Bailey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Tale of Sandy Chipmunk

Author: Arthur Scott Bailey

Posting Date: January 25, 2013 [EBook #9462]
Release Date: 
First Posted: 
Last Updated: 

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALE OF SANDY CHIPMUNK ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team










                            _SLEEPY-TIME_




                        THE TALE OF SANDY CHIPMUNK

                                   BY

                           ARTHUR SCOTT BAILEY




ILLUSTRATED BY HARRY L. SMITH


1916



[Illustration: Sandy Was So Startled That He Dropped the Eggs]



CONTENTS


CHAPTER

    I SANDY'S NAME

   II SOMETHING IN THE SKY

  III THE BROKEN EGG

   IV BUILDING A HOUSE

    V MRS. CHIPMUNK IS GLAD

   VI SAMPLES OF WHEAT

  VII UNCLE SAMMY'S STORE

 VIII THE BASKET OF CORN

   IX WORKING FOR MR. CROW

    X MR. CROW SCOLDS SANDY

   XI THE MAIL-BOX

  XII SANDY GETS A LETTER

 XIII A RIDE TO THE MILLER'S

  XIV A LUCKY ACCIDENT

   XV THE ROWDY OF THE WOODS

  XVI ROWDY RUNS AWAY

 XVII CORN-PLANTING TIME

XVIII SANDY LIKES MILK

  XIX WHAT THE OLD COW DID




ILLUSTRATIONS


SANDY WAS SO STARTLED THAT HE DROPPED THE EGGS

MRS. CHIPMUNK WENT TO THE DOOR WITH SANDY

HE DROPPED THE GRAIN IN FRONT OF UNCLE SAMMY

UNCLE SAMMY SEARCHED HIS SHELVES CAREFULLY

"HERE'S A LETTER FOR ME!" SAID SANDY CHIPMUNK

FARMER GREEN'S CAT LEAPED OUT OF THE DOORWAY




THE TALE OF SANDY CHIPMUNK




I

SANDY'S NAME


In the first place, no doubt you will want to learn why he was known as
_Sandy_. Many others, before you, have wondered how Sandy Chipmunk came
by his name.

Whenever any one asked Sandy himself why he was so called, he always said
that he was in too great a hurry to stop to explain. And it is a fact
that of all the four-footed folk in Pleasant Valley--and on Blue Mountain
as well--he was one of the busiest. He was a great worker. And when he
played--as he sometimes did--he played just as hard as he worked.

In spite of his being so busy, there may have been another reason why he
never would tell any one why he was named Sandy. Jimmy Rabbit was the
first to suggest that perhaps Sandy Chipmunk didn't know.

Jimmy and some of his neighbors were sunning themselves in Farmer Green's
pasture one day. And while they were idling away the afternoon Sandy
Chipmunk scurried past on top of the stone wall, with his cheek-pouches
full of nuts.

"There goes Sandy Chipmunk!" Jimmy Rabbit exclaimed. He called to Sandy.
But Sandy did not stop. He made no answer, either, beyond a flick of his
tail. You see, his mouth was so full that he couldn't say a word.

"I was going to ask him about his name," Jimmy Rabbit remarked. "I've
almost made up my mind that he doesn't know any more about it than
anybody else."

"Probably he doesn't," Fatty Coon agreed. "But it's easy to see why he's
called Sandy. He likes to dig in the _sandy_ soil in this pasture."

"I don't agree with you," Billy Woodchuck said. "_I_ think he was named
Sandy on account of his yellowish, reddish, brownish color."

Some of the others thought that Billy might have guessed the right
answer. But Frisky Squirrel told them that that wasn't the reason at all.

"It's because he's _plucky_," he declared. "You know, _gritty_ is the
same as _plucky_. And _sandy_ is the same as _gritty_. That's the
reason," Frisky said. "It's plain as the nose on your face." He was
looking straight at Tommy Fox as he said that.

Now, Tommy Fox had a very long nose. And he became angry at once. His
face would have grown red, probably, if it hadn't been that color always.

"You don't know what you're talking about!" he snapped.

Old Mr. Crow, who sat in a tree nearby, nodded his head.

"You're all wrong," he told them. "The reason for calling that young
Chipmunk boy Sandy is because his real name is Alexander. And everybody
who knows anything at all knows that Sandy is just a short way of saying
Alexander."

When they heard that, Fatty Coon and Billy Woodchuck and Frisky Squirrel
looked foolish. People thought Mr. Crow was a wise old gentleman. And
when he said a thing was so, that usually settled it.

"Here he comes again!" Mr. Crow said.

They all looked around. And sure enough! there was Sandy Chipmunk,
hurrying along the top of the wall, to get more nuts to store away for
the winter.

"Wait a moment!" Mr. Crow called to him. "I want to tell you something."

Sandy Chipmunk came to a halt and sat up on top of a stone, with his tail
curled over his back.

"Talk fast, please!" he said. "I'm in a great hurry. Winter will be here
before you know it. And I want to store away a great many nuts before
somebody else gathers them all."

"I won't keep you long," Mr. Crow told him. "It's about your name--"

"I've no time to stop to explain," Sandy Chipmunk interrupted. "As I
said, I'm very busy to-day." And he started to scamper along the wall
again.

Once more Mr. Crow stopped him.

"You don't understand," he said. "I don't want to _ask_ you anything. I
want to _tell_ you something."

"Oh!" said Sandy. "That's different. What is it?"

"It's quite a joke," Mr. Crow said. And he laughed loudly. "These young
fellows here have been trying to tell one another why you're called
Sandy. One of 'em says it's because you like to dig in the sandy soil;
and another says it's because of your color; and still another claims
it's because you're plucky. But I tell 'em it's because your real name is
Alexander. And of course I'm right," said old Mr. Crow.

Sandy Chipmunk smiled. And then he started off again. And again Mr. Crow
stopped him.

"Quite a joke on these youngsters--isn't it?" he inquired.

"You told me you didn't want to _ask_ me anything," Sandy Chipmunk
reminded him. "But I will say this--though I am in a great hurry: So far
as I know, you are all of you right. And that's a joke on you, Mr. Crow."

Then Sandy Chipmunk scampered off. And everybody laughed--except Mr.
Crow.

"Alexander Chipmunk is a very pert young man," he grumbled.




II

SOMETHING IN THE SKY


When Sandy Chipmunk was just a little chap his mother began to teach him
to take care of himself. She told him that among other enemies he must
always watch out for foxes and minks and weasels--especially weasels.

"They are very dangerous," Mrs. Chipmunk said.

"Well, I'll always be safe if I climb a tree--won't I?" Sandy asked her.

"Goodness, no!" his mother replied. "There are many big birds--such as
hawks and owls and eagles--that would catch you if they could.... But
I'll tell you about _them_ some other time, Sandy."

Well, Sandy Chipmunk went out to play. But he didn't have what you would
call a good time, because he couldn't help thinking of his mother's
warning. He kept looking all around to see whether a weasel or a mink or
a fox might be trying to steal up behind him. And he kept looking up to
make sure that no big bird was ready to swoop down upon him.

But nothing of the sort happened--at least, not until the middle of the
afternoon. Sandy had begun to believe that his mother was too timid. He
did not think there was anything in Farmer Green's pasture to be afraid
of. There were the cows--nothing seemed to worry _them_. They ate grass,
or chewed their cuds, and never once looked behind them.

Sandy Chipmunk wandered further and further from home. For a long time he
had not taken the trouble to look at the sky. But at last he glanced up.
And to his great alarm he saw, hovering in the air far above him, an
enormous creature. He had never seen its like before. It seemed all head
and tail. Two great eyes stared at Sandy Chipmunk and sent a chill of
fear over him. The monster's wide mouth grinned at him cruelly. And its
long tail lashed back and forth as if its owner were very angry. Even as
Sandy looked at the creature it gave a horrid scream.

Sandy Chipmunk did not wait for anything else. He turned and ran home.
And a few of his friends who happened to see him remarked that he seemed
to be in a greater hurry than ever.

Sandy felt better when he found himself safe in his mother's house. And
he told Mrs. Chipmunk what he had seen.

"It may be an owl," he said, "because it has big, round eyes. But its
tail was not like any owl's tail that I ever saw. It was like six
catamounts' tails, all tied in knots."

"That's queer!" his mother remarked. "I never knew of a bird with a tail
like that."

"Maybe it's a beast that has learned to fly," Sandy suggested.

"Beasts can't fly," Mrs. Chipmunk said.

But Sandy knew better than that.

"There's the Flying-Squirrel family," he reminded her.

"They can only fly from one tree to another," his mother told him. "I
think I'll peep out and see for myself what this strange creature looks
like."

He begged her not to. But Mrs. Chipmunk said she would be careful. And
she went out and looked up at the sky.

Sandy was surprised when she came back laughing.

"What is it, Mother?" he asked. "Is it a bird or a beast?"

"Neither!" Mrs. Chipmunk answered with a smile.

"Then it must be a fish!" Sandy exclaimed.

"No! It's not a fish, either," his mother said. "It's nothing but a kite
that Johnnie Green has made. He has painted eyes and a mouth on it. And I
must say that if I didn't know a kite when I saw one it might have
frightened me."

"But what makes it lash its tail that way?" Sandy asked her.

"The wind is blowing it," Mrs. Chipmunk explained.

"What made it scream?" Sandy inquired.

"It didn't," his mother replied.

[Illustration: Mrs. Chipmunk Went to the Door with Sandy]

Now, Sandy Chipmunk knew better than to contradict his mother. So all he
said was this:

"Let's go outside and listen!"

Still smiling, Mrs. Chipmunk went to the door again with Sandy. And
pretty soon they heard a long, far-off wail.

"There!" he cried. "That's it! Don't you hear it, Mother?"

"That--" Mrs. Chipmunk said--"that is nothing but the whistle of an
engine, way down at the other end of Pleasant Valley."




III

THE BROKEN EGG


Nuts and grains were what Sandy Chipmunk ate more than anything else. But
sometimes when he could not find enough of those, or when he wanted a
change of food, he would eat almost any sort of berry, and apples and
pears as well. Tomatoes, too, he liked once in a while. And he was very
fond of sunflower seeds. He would not refuse a fat insect, either, if it
flew his way. But these were not the only dainties that Sandy thought
good. There was something else--something to be found in trees--for which
Sandy sometimes hunted. And before he came home, after finding what he
was looking for, he always wiped his mouth with great care.

If you had ever seen him wiping his mouth like that, you might have
guessed that Sandy Chipmunk had been eating birds' eggs. And the reason
he was so careful to remove all signs of his feast was because he did not
want his mother to know what he had been doing.

Now you have heard the worst there is to know about Sandy Chipmunk.

To you it may seem odd that Mrs. Chipmunk did not think it wrong to rob
birds' nests. And now you know the worst about _her_.

Sandy's mother liked eggs just as much as he did. But her son was such
a little fellow that she was afraid he might get hurt climbing trees
and looking for eggs. She told him that some day some bird might
surprise him when he was enjoying a meal of her eggs, and peck out one
or two of his eyes.

"Keep away from the nests!" Mrs. Chipmunk said.

But Sandy had had too many tastes of birds' eggs. He simply couldn't
resist eating a few eggs now and then. Of course, when he did that he
disobeyed his mother. And of course, if she had known it she would have
punished him.

As the spring days sped past, the birds that lived in Farmer Green's
pasture grew very angry with Sandy Chipmunk. You see, it was not
long before they discovered who it was that was robbing their nests
now and then.

"You'd better leave birds' eggs alone!" Mr. Crow warned him one day. "A
number of my friends have told me what they're going to do to you, if
they catch you near their nests."

But Sandy told Mr. Crow to keep his advice to himself.

"What about Farmer Green's corn?" Sandy asked the old gentleman. "I've
heard that Farmer Green is looking for you with a gun."

Mr. Crow didn't even answer him. He just flew away. There were some
things he didn't like to talk about.

That very afternoon Sandy Chipmunk spied a robin's nest in a tree not far
from where he lived. And in less time than it takes to tell it, he had
climbed the tree and run out on the limb where the nest rested.

Sandy Chipmunk smiled as he peered into the robin's nest. The four
greenish-blue eggs that he saw there looked very good to him. And he
smacked his lips--though his mother had often told him not to. He was
just picking the eggs out of the nest when he heard a rustle in the
leaves over his head. And Sandy Chipmunk looked up quickly.

It seemed to him, at first, that the air was full of monstrous birds.
Actually, there were only three of them--Mr. and Mrs. Robin and a
neighbor of theirs. But to Sandy they looked six times as big as they
really were. _That_ was because they had caught him robbing the nest.

He was so startled that he dropped the eggs. They fell back into the
nest--all except one, which broke upon the ground beneath the tree.

"Robber!" Mrs. Robin screamed.

"Thief!" Mr. Robin roared.

"Villain!" their neighbor cried.

It is a wonder they didn't fly straight at Sandy and knock him off the
limb.

At first he was too frightened to say a word. But when he saw that he
wasn't hurt, Sandy looked down at the broken egg and said:

"What a pity!" He meant it, too. For he thought it was a shame to waste a
perfectly good egg like that, when he might have eaten it.

"You don't mean you're sorry, do you?" Mrs. Robin asked him.

"Certainly I am!" Sandy told her. "I was just counting your eggs. And
when you startled me, I dropped that one. I thought it must be a hawk,
you all made such a noise."

"You're sure you weren't going to eat our eggs?" Mr. Robin inquired.

"Eat them!" Sandy exclaimed. "Why, my mother has often told me not to eat
birds' eggs."

When he heard that, Mr. Robin whispered something to his wife. And then
he said to Sandy Chipmunk:

"You go home! And don't let me catch you around this tree again!"

Sandy was glad to escape so easily as that. And though he was sorry to
have missed a good meal, there was one thing that made him almost
happy: He didn't have to bother to wipe his mouth before he let his
mother see him.




IV

BUILDING A HOUSE


There came a day when Sandy Chipmunk decided that he was old enough and
big enough to make a house of his own. He was not the sort of person to
think and think about a thing and put off the doing of it from one day to
another. So the moment the idea of a house popped into his head Sandy
Chipmunk began hunting for a good place to dig.

It was not long before he found a bit of ground that seemed to him the
very best spot for a home that any one could want.

The place where he intended to make his front door was in the middle of a
smooth plot among some beech trees. Farmer Green's cows had clipped the
grass short all around. And Sandy knew that he could have a neat dooryard
without being obliged to go to the trouble of cutting the grass himself.
But what he liked most of all about the place was that as he stood there
he could look all around in every direction. That was just what he
wanted, because whenever he wished to leave his new house he would be
able to peep out and see whether anybody was waiting to catch him.

So Sandy Chipmunk took off his little, short coat, folded it carefully,
and laid it down upon the grass. Then he pulled off his necktie and
unbuttoned his collar. Just because he was going to dig in the ground
there was no reason why he should get his clothes dirty.

After that Sandy Chipmunk set to work. And you should have seen how he
made the earth fly. When night came and he had to stop working there was
a big heap of dirt beneath the beech trees, to show how busy Sandy had
been. There was a big hole in the pasture, too. But it was nothing at
all, compared with the hole Sandy had dug by the time he had finished
his house.

Every morning Sandy Chipmunk came back to the grove of beech trees to
work upon his new house. And it was not many days before his burrow was
so deep that when winter came the ground about his chamber would not
freeze. It was what Farmer Green would have called "below frost-line."

You must not think it was an easy matter for Sandy Chipmunk to dig a
home. You must remember that somehow he had to bring the dirt out of his
tunnel to the top of the ground. And he did that by _pushing it ahead of
him with his nose_.

You may laugh when you hear that. But for Sandy Chipmunk it was no
laughing matter. If _he_ had laughed, just as likely as not he would have
found his mouth full of dirt. And you can understand that that wouldn't
have been very pleasant.

As it was, his face was very dirty. But he never went back to his
mother's house until he had washed it carefully, just as a cat washes her
face.

Sometimes Sandy found stones in his way, down there beneath the pasture.
And those he had to push up, too. Sometimes a stone was too big to crowd
through the opening into the world outside. And then Sandy had to make
the opening bigger. After he had done that, and pushed the stone out upon
his dirt-pile, he would make his doorway smaller again by packing earth
firmly into it.

You must not suppose that when Sandy brought the loose dirt and stones up
through his doorway he left them there. Not at all! He pushed all the
litter some distance away. And whenever he turned, to scamper down into
his burrow again, he would kick behind him, as hard as he could, to
scatter the dirt still further from his new house.

After Sandy had made himself a chamber where he could sleep, and where he
could store enough food to last him throughout the winter, any one would
naturally imagine that his house was finished. But Sandy Chipmunk was not
yet satisfied with his new home. There was still something else that he
wanted to do to it.




V

MRS. CHIPMUNK IS GLAD


After Sandy Chipmunk had dug his chamber underneath Farmer Green's
pasture, he liked the _inside_ of his house quite well. But the looks of
the _outside_ did not please him at all. He wanted a neat dooryard. And
how could he have that, with that yawning hole through which he had
pushed earth and stones, which still littered the grass a little
distance away?

Luckily, Sandy knew exactly what to do. So he set to work to close the
big work-hole. It was no easy task--as you can believe. But at last he
managed to pack the hole full of dirt.

Then he had no door at all. And there he was in the dark, inside the
hall that led to his chamber and storeroom. But that did not worry Sandy.
You see, he knew just what he was about. And before long he had dug a new
doorway--a small, neat, round hole, which you would probably have walked
right past, without noticing it, it was so hard to see in the grass that
grew thickly about it.

You might think that at last Sandy's house was finished. But he was not
satisfied with it until he had made still another doorway, in the same
fashion. He knew that it was safer to have an extra door through which he
could slip out when some enemy was entering by the other one. Then Sandy
Chipmunk's house was finished. And he was greatly pleased with it.

But his work was not yet done. He had to furnish his chamber. So he began
to hunt about for dry leaves, to make him a bed. These he stuffed into
his cheek-pouches and carried into his house. But he didn't march proudly
up to one of his two doors. Oh, no! He reached it by careful leaps and
bounds. And when he left home again he was particular to go in the same
manner in which he had come.

It made no difference which of his doors Sandy used. He always came and
went like that, because he didn't want to wear a path to either of his
two doors or tramp down the grass around them. If he had been so careless
as to let people notice where he lived he would have been almost sure to
have enemies prowling about his house. And if a weasel had happened to
see one of Sandy's neat doorways he would have pushed right in, in the
hope of finding Sandy inside his house.

In that case the weasel would probably have pushed out again, with Sandy
inside _him_. So you can understand that Sandy Chipmunk had the best of
reasons for being careful.

After he had made a soft, warm bed for himself, Sandy set to work to
gather nuts and grain, to store in his house and eat during the winter.
He was particular to choose only well cured (or dried) food, for he knew
that that was the only sort that would keep through the long winter, down
in his underground storeroom.

He gathered other food, too, besides nuts and grain. Near Farmer Green's
house he found some plump sunflower seeds, which he added to his store.
Then there were wild-cherry pits, too, which the birds had dropped upon
the ground. All these, and many other kinds of food, found their way into
Sandy Chipmunk's home.

Much as he liked such things to eat--and especially sunflower seeds--he
never ate a single nut or grain or seed while he gathered them for his
winter's food. And when you stop to remember that he had to carry
everything home in his _mouth_, you can see that Sandy Chipmunk had what
is called self-control.

His mother had always told him that he couldn't get through a winter
without that. And so, when Sandy brought her to see his new home, after
it was all finished, and his bed was neatly made, and his storeroom full
of food, Mrs. Chipmunk was delighted.

"I'm glad to see--" she said--"I'm glad to see that all my talking has
done some good."




VI

SAMPLES OF WHEAT


There was so much said about Sandy Chipmunk's store of nuts and grain
that a few of the forest-people began to wish they had some of Sandy's
winter food for themselves. Uncle Sammy Coon, an old scamp who lived over
near the swamp, was one of those who began to plan to get Sandy's hoard
away from him.

It was the grain that Uncle Sammy wanted. If he had spent in honest work
one-half the time he used in planning some trickery he would have been
much better off. But he hated work more than anything else in the world.

Uncle Sammy Coon scarcely slept at all for several days, he was so busy
thinking about Sandy's grain. And since he always passed his nights in
wandering through the woods, he became almost ill.

The trouble was, Uncle Sammy was far too big to crawl inside Sandy's
house. And he knew that the only way he could get at the grain was to
persuade somebody to bring it outside for him.

At last he thought of a fine scheme. And as soon as it came into his head
he hobbled over to Sandy Chipmunk's home. I say _hobbled_, because Uncle
Sammy had a lame knee. He always claimed that he was injured in battle.
But almost every one knew that he hurt his knee one time when Farmer
Green caught him stealing a hen.

When he reached the pasture Uncle Sammy found Sandy Chipmunk just
starting away to hunt for nuts.

[Illustration: He Dropped the Grain in Front of Uncle Sammy]

"Good morning!" the old fellow said. He spoke very pleasantly, though he
was so sleepy that he felt disagreeable enough. "I've come over to buy
something from your store."

"My store!" Sandy Chipmunk exclaimed.

"Yes!" said Uncle Sammy Coon. "I've heard you have a store here with a
heap of nuts and grain to sell."

Now, it had never occurred to Sandy Chipmunk to _sell_ any of the food he
had gathered for the winter. But when Uncle Sammy put the idea in his
head Sandy rather liked it.

"I have a fine stock, to be sure," he said. "The nuts are specially good.
How many would you like to buy?"

But Uncle Sammy Coon told him he didn't want any nuts.

"I never eat them," he said. "It's grain that I want. And I'll buy as
much as you care to sell.... Bring a sample of it up here," he urged.
"I'd like to see if it's as good as people say."

So Sandy Chipmunk darted into his house. And soon he appeared again with
his cheek-pouches crammed full of wheat kernels.

"There!" he cried, when he had dropped the grain in front of Uncle Sammy.
"Just try a little of it! You'll agree with me that it's very fine."

Uncle Sammy not only tried a little. He gobbled up every single kernel.

"It seems to me to have a queer taste," he said. "Bring up some more!"

And Sandy scurried down into his house again, to bob up in a few moments
with another sample of his grain.

Once more Uncle Sammy ate it all.

"It's a bit damp," he remarked, as he smacked his lips. "I hope it's not
moldy.... You'd better let me see another sample."

Uncle Sammy declared the next heap of kernels to be altogether too dry.
And he kept ordering Sandy to fetch more for him to "taste," as he called
it. Some of the wheat he considered too ripe, and some too green. Some of
the kernels--so he said--were too little, and others too big. And finally
he even told Sandy Chipmunk that he was afraid Sandy was trying to sell
him _last year's_ wheat.

Now, Sandy knew that his wheat was fresh--all of it. So he went down and
brought up still another load.

Uncle Sammy ate that more slowly, for by this time he had had a good
meal.

"How do you like it?" Sandy asked him.

"It's fair," Uncle Sammy replied. "But I believe it's _next year's_
wheat. And of course I wouldn't think of buying that kind.... I guess I
can't trade with you, after all." And he started to hobble away.

When Sandy heard that, and saw the old fellow leaving, he began to scold.

"Aren't you going to pay me for what you've eaten?" he asked.

"What! Pay you for the samples?" Uncle Sammy asked. "I guess, young man,
you don't know much about keeping a store. Nobody ever pays for samples."
And he went away muttering to himself.

Sandy Chipmunk felt very sad. Uncle Sammy had eaten half his winter's
supply of wheat.

Sandy was angry, too. And for several days he was busier than ever,
trying to think of some way in which he could make Uncle Sammy Coon pay
him.




VII

UNCLE SAMMY'S STORE


Not long after Uncle Sammy Coon ate half of Sandy Chipmunk's wheat
without paying for it he seemed to grow lamer than ever. And he walked
less than ever, too. A good many of the forest-folk said that he really
wasn't any lamer--but he was lazier.

However that may have been, he began to stay at home a good deal of the
time. And finally Sandy Chipmunk heard that Uncle Sammy had opened a
store, in which he kept all sorts of good things to eat.

When Sandy learned that he lost no time in going over to Uncle Sammy's
house near the swamp.

Sure enough! There he found Uncle Sammy sitting behind a long table. And
behind him were shelves loaded with apples, pears, corn, nuts and many
other kinds of food.

"I'd like to buy some nuts," Sandy Chipmunk told the old gentleman.

"Nuts?" said Uncle Sammy. "I have some fine nuts."

"Let me see a sample," Sandy said.

But Uncle Sammy never stirred.

"There they are, right on the shelf!" he said. "Look at them all
you want to."

"I'll eat one and see how I like it," said Sandy Chipmunk.

But Uncle Sammy shook his head.

"No!" he replied. "That's the old-fashioned way of keeping a store. I
don't give away any samples."

When Sandy heard that he was angrier than ever. And he wished he had
never given Uncle Sammy any samples of his wheat. But he knew there was
no use of _appearing angry_. So he smiled and asked:

"What is the price of your beechnuts?"

"For one handful, you will have to pay me an ear of corn," Uncle
Sammy said.

"I'll take a handful," said Sandy.

Still the old fellow never stirred.

"Where's your ear of corn?" he inquired.

"Oh! I'll give you that the next time I pass this way," said Sandy. And
he made up his mind that he would take good care to keep away from Uncle
Sammy's house.

But Uncle Sammy Coon was too sharp.

"That won't do at all," he said. "I must have the corn before I give you
the nuts."

So Sandy Chipmunk stepped to the door.

"I'll come back soon," he said. And he ran all the way to Farmer Green's
cornfield, to get an ear of green corn. And then he ran all the way back
to Uncle Sammy's house.

"There!" Sandy said. "There's your ear of corn!" He laid it upon the
table. "Now give me a handful of beechnuts."

"Step right in and help yourself," Uncle Sammy answered.

"No!" said Sandy. "You give me the nuts." He knew that Uncle Sammy's
hands were much bigger than his own and would hold more nuts.

"I should think you might get them," the old scamp grumbled. "I've a lame
knee, you know."

"But I said a 'handful'--not a 'kneeful,'" Sandy answered. "Of course, if
you don't want this juicy ear of corn, there are others that would like
it." He started to pick the ear of corn off the table when Uncle Sammy
rose quickly.

"All right!" he cried. "But it's the old-fashioned way; and I don't like
it." Then he gave Sandy a small handful of beechnuts.

Sandy Chipmunk ate them right on the spot. And he began to feel very
happy. He had noticed that Uncle Sammy tossed the ear of corn into a
basket which stood beneath the table. And the basket was full of corn.
Sandy could reach it just as easily from the front of the table as Uncle
Sammy could from behind it.

And Sandy Chipmunk had thought all at once of a way to get a good many
nuts away from Uncle Sammy, to pay for all the wheat Uncle Sammy had
eaten.




VIII

THE BASKET OF CORN


"What are those nuts on the top shelf?" Sandy Chipmunk asked Uncle
Sammy Coon.

Now, Uncle Sammy had been keeping store so short a time that he didn't
exactly know what was on every one of his shelves. So he wheeled around
and looked up. And as soon as his back was turned, Sandy Chipmunk reached
down under the table and pulled an ear of corn out of the big basket.

"They're butternuts," Uncle Sammy said. "And they're the same price as
the beechnuts."

"Give me one handful," Sandy said.

"_Give_ you a handful--" Uncle Sammy snapped.

But Sandy Chipmunk smiled at him.

"I mean, _sell_ me a handful," he explained. "And here's your ear of
corn." It really was Uncle Sammy's ear of corn, you know--just as
Sandy said.

But Uncle Sammy didn't know that. He didn't know it had come out of his
own basket. So he threw it into the basket and set a handful of
butternuts before Sandy Chipmunk.

Sandy was longer eating those, for the shells were harder and thicker
than the beechnut shells. But in a little while he was ready for more.

"How about your chestnuts?" he asked.

And Uncle Sammy turned his back again.

"I have a few," he said.

"I'll buy a handful," Sandy told him, as he pulled another ear of corn
out of the basket.

And after that Sandy bought hickory nuts and hazelnuts and walnuts.

"How about peanuts?" he asked then. "I've never eaten any; but I've heard
they are very good."

Uncle Sammy stood up and searched his shelves very carefully. And while
he was searching, Sandy Chipmunk took six ears of green corn out of the
big basket under the table.

"I don't seem to have any peanuts," Uncle Sammy Coon said at last.

"Well--have you any nutmegs?" Sandy inquired.

And while Uncle Sammy was looking for nutmegs, Sandy Chipmunk slyly took
six more ears from the basket. He had more corn now than he could carry.
So he quickly tossed it out through the doorway.

[Illustration: Uncle Sammy Searched His Shelves Carefully]

Uncle Sammy Coon had to admit at last that he had no nutmegs. But Sandy
kept him busy hunting for almonds and Brazil nuts and pecans, though he
knew well enough that nothing of the sort grew in those woods.

By the time Uncle Sammy stopped looking there was no more corn left in
his basket. But there was a great pile of corn on the ground just outside
his door, where Sandy Chipmunk had thrown it.

Then Sandy said he must be going. And long before Uncle Sammy stirred out
of his house Sandy had carried the corn away and hid it in a good, safe
place. He thought that if he left it to dry it would make just as good
food for winter as the wheat Uncle Sammy had eaten. And that was just
what happened.

That night, long after Sandy Chipmunk had left the store, Uncle Sammy
Coon had a great surprise. When he went to the basket, to get some green
corn for his supper, there was not a single ear there.

"That's queer!" Uncle Sammy Coon exclaimed. "It was full this afternoon.
And now there's not an ear left. I don't remember eating it." He thought
deeply for a long time. And after a while he said to himself: "I wonder
if it could have been that Chipmunk boy?" But he decided that Sandy was
too small to have carried away all those big ears under his very nose. "I
must have eaten it," he told himself. "I'm getting terribly forgetful."

And since he thought he had already had his supper, Uncle Sammy Coon went
to bed without any supper at all.




IX

WORKING FOR MR. CROW


Old Mr. Crow had decided that he would not fly south to spend the
winter. He said he was getting almost too old for such a long journey.
And he remembered, too, that he had heard the weather was going to be
mild that winter.

"There's just one thing that worries me," he told Aunt Polly Woodchuck
one day, when he was talking the matter over with her. "I don't know what
I shall have to eat."

"Why, you can sleep until spring, just as I do," Aunt Polly said. "Then
you won't want anything to eat."

But Mr. Crow said he was a light sleeper and that he could no more sleep
the whole winter long than Aunt Polly could fly.

"Then why don't you store up some corn, the way the squirrels do?" she
asked him. There was one thing about Aunt Polly--she always had a remedy
for everything.

"That's a good idea!" Mr. Crow told her. "Maybe I can get somebody to
help me, too."

And that very day he went to Sandy Chipmunk and asked him if he didn't
want to gather some food for him.

"How much will you pay me?" Sandy asked him.

"I'll give you half what you gather for me," said Mr. Crow. "And that's
certainly fair, I'm sure. It's often done. And it's called 'working at
the halves.'"

It seemed fair to Sandy Chipmunk, too.

"That's a bargain," he said. "I'll begin right away. Where do you want me
to hide the food for you, Mr. Crow?"

Old Mr. Crow told Sandy to put it in his house in the top of the tall elm
tree.

"I don't like to climb so high," Sandy objected. "You know I'm not so
good a climber as Frisky Squirrel. He wouldn't mind climbing up to your
house. But it might make me dizzy."

"Well," said Mr. Crow, "why don't you bring the food to the foot of my
tree and get Frisky Squirrel to carry it to the top?"

"I'll do it," said Sandy Chipmunk--"if Frisky is willing." So he went off
to find Frisky Squirrel, who proved to be much interested in the plan.

"How much will you pay me?" he asked Sandy Chipmunk.

"I suppose you ought to have half the food," Sandy said. "That's what
Mr. Crow is paying me."

Frisky Squirrel said that that seemed fair. So they set to work at once.
And every time Sandy brought a load of food to the foot of the tall elm,
where Mr. Crow lived, he found Frisky Squirrel waiting for him.

"Let's see--" Frisky said, when Sandy brought the first load--"since I'm
to get half, I'll take everything you bring in your left cheek-pouch. And
you can take what you bring in the right one."

Sandy Chipmunk said that that seemed fair. So each time he came to the
elm he left with Frisky only what he carried in his left cheek-pouch. And
before gathering more food he scampered home to store away his own share.

So the day passed. And when evening came, and the sun was dropping out
of sight in the west, Sandy and Frisky decided they had worked long
enough for Mr. Crow.

"Don't you suppose he has enough food by this time?" Sandy asked. He
looked up at Mr. Crow's house. "We mustn't fill his house too full," he
said. "He has to have room for himself, you know."

"I don't think he'll have any trouble getting inside it," Frisky
Squirrel answered.

"Well--I'm glad you helped me," Sandy told him. "If it didn't make me
dizzy to climb so high I'd like to take a look at Mr. Crow's food. I hope
he'll be pleased."

"I hope he will," Frisky Squirrel agreed.

Sandy Chipmunk noticed that Frisky Squirrel was smiling. But he thought
that it was only because he was thinking about Mr. Crow, and how happy
he would be.

"Let's wait here till he comes home," Sandy suggested.

But Frisky Squirrel said that he was going to bed early that night,
because he expected to have a race with the sun the next morning.

"I'm going to try to beat him," he explained. "I'm going to see if I
can't get up before he does."

So Frisky said good-night and left Sandy to wait for Mr. Crow alone.




X

MR. CROW SCOLDS SANDY


When he finally reached home, after Sandy Chipmunk had been working for
him all day, Mr. Crow was feeling very pleasant. You know, he thought
that his winter's food must be in his house. And that alone is enough to
make any one happy. But what Mr. Crow liked most about his bargain was
the fact that he wouldn't have to pay Sandy for his work. He had said to
Sandy: "I'll agree to give you half what you gather for me." And Sandy
Chipmunk had never stopped to think that that was not any pay at all. For
he might have gathered the food for himself, and had all, instead of
only half of it. As it was, Sandy Chipmunk was paying himself for working
for Mr. Crow. And Mr. Crow seemed to be the only one that was wise enough
to know it.

Mr. Crow dropped down upon the ground beside Sandy Chipmunk.

"Well," he said, "have you finished?"

"Yes!" Sandy answered. "And I hope you'll like what I've done. I'll wait
here until you fly up to your house and look at the food."

"All right!" Mr. Crow told him. He flapped his big, black wings. And soon
he had risen to the top of the tall elm.

Sandy watched him as he looked inside his house. At first Mr. Crow only
stared--and said nothing. And then--to Sandy's astonishment--he began to
scold.

"What's the trouble?" Sandy Chipmunk called.

"Trouble?" Mr. Crow cried, as he flew down again. "There's trouble
enough. Why, you haven't kept your bargain!"

Sandy Chipmunk declared that he had done exactly as he had agreed.

"I brought load after load of food to the foot of this tree,"
he explained. "Half of it I took for myself--just as you suggested. Of
course, I had to pay Frisky Squirrel for helping me. I paid him half the
food for carrying it up to your house."

"That's it!" Mr. Crow cried. "That's the trouble! You took half and
Frisky Squirrel took half. So of course there was no food left for me.
There are two halves in a whole, you know."

"You must be mistaken," Sandy told him politely. "There's only _one_ half
in my hole. I put my half there myself, and I ought to know."

Mr. Crow looked as if he thought Sandy Chipmunk must be playing a trick
on him. But pretty soon he saw that it was not so.

"You don't seem to understand," Mr. Crow said. "I don't believe you've
ever studied fractions."

Sandy Chipmunk admitted that he never had.

"Ah!" Mr. Crow exclaimed. "This is what comes of hiring stupid people
to work for one. Here I've wasted all my corn. And I get nothing for it
but trouble."

"Corn!" Sandy Chipmunk exclaimed. "I don't know anything about any corn!"

"Well, you certainly are stupid!" Mr. Crow told him crossly. "Didn't you
spend the whole day gathering corn for me?"

"No, indeed!" Sandy replied. "I gathered beechnuts, Mr. Crow."

"Beechnuts!" Mr. Crow repeated. "I never told you I wanted _nuts_. I'd
starve, trying to live on nuts; for they don't agree with me at all. And
I make it a rule never to eat them. _Corn_ is what I want."

"You didn't say so," Sandy Chipmunk said. "You asked me to gather _food_
for you. And every one knows there's no better food than beechnuts to
last through the winter."

"That--" said Mr. Crow--"that is where we do not agree. I supposed you
knew I wanted corn. But there's no great harm done, anyhow," he added.
"Tomorrow you can gather _corn_ for me--now that you know what I want. No
doubt you can get Frisky Squirrel to help you again. But you must pay him
with _your_ share of the corn--not with mine."

"But then there wouldn't be any left for me," Sandy objected.

"But just think of all the beechnuts you have," Mr. Crow reminded him.

Sandy Chipmunk shook his head. "I'm afraid I'm too stupid to work for
you any more," he told Mr. Crow.

"Oh! I didn't mean what I said," Mr. Crow hastened to explain.

"Then--" Sandy said--"then how do I know that you mean what you say when
you tell me you want corn to eat?"

And Mr. Crow could find no answer to that. He was disappointed, too. For
he was afraid he would have to go south to spend the winter, after all.




XI

THE MAIL-BOX


Climbing an oak at the cross-roads one day, not far from Farmer Green's
house, Sandy Chipmunk discovered a queer box nailed to the trunk of the
tree. Much as he wanted to, he couldn't look inside the box, because its
lid was closed. And since Sandy was afraid the box might be some sort of
trap, he didn't dare go near it and poke at the lid.

Later that day Sandy told Frisky Squirrel about the strange box. And
Frisky told Fatty Coon. And Fatty Coon told somebody else.

So the news traveled, until at last it reached the sharp ears of old Mr.
Crow.

By the time Mr. Crow heard the story it had grown amazingly. And it went
something like this: Farmer Green had bought a new trap in the village.
And he had nailed it on a tree to catch all sorts of animals and birds.
And after he had caught all the forest-folk in Pleasant Valley he
intended to take the trap to Swift River and set it for fish and eels
and turtles.

When Mr. Crow heard the news he _haw-hawed_ loudly.

"What are you laughing about?" Jasper Jay asked him. (It was Jasper who
repeated the story to Mr. Crow.) "You wouldn't think it was such a joke
if you were caught in the trap."

"Trap!" Mr. Crow sneered. "That's no trap. That's what's called a
_mail-box_. Every day a man with letters and newspapers drives over here
from the village. And he stops at the cross-roads and leaves something in
the box for Farmer Green."

As soon as he heard that, Jasper Jay flew away to tell everybody about
the mail-box. And at last Sandy Chipmunk heard the story. But by the time
it reached his ears--after it had been told by one person to another
almost forty times--the story was somewhat different from what it had
been when Mr. Crow first told it to Jasper Jay. This is what Sandy heard:
The thing on the tree was a mailbox. Every day a man drove from the
village in a wagon drawn by twelve horses. He had a load of letters as
big as six haystacks. And he left a handful of letters in that box,
because he wanted to get rid of them so he could go back to the village
for more. And any one could take a letter--if it happened to be for him.

It was Frisky Squirrel who told the story to Sandy. Of course, after so
much telling it had changed a good deal. But Sandy Chipmunk didn't know
that. And he hurried to the cross-roads at once, to watch for the man
driving the twelve horses.

When he reached the oak, where the box was, Sandy climbed the tree and
perched himself on a limb and waited. He had not sat there long before he
saw a man drive up the road. Sandy Chipmunk was surprised when the man
stopped beneath the tree and dropped some letters and newspapers into the
box. He was surprised because the man drove only one horse, instead of
twelve. And the man had only a single bag of mail in his wagon, instead
of a great heap--as big as six haystacks.

Sandy Chipmunk was somewhat disappointed. But he was glad of one thing:
The man left the lid of the box open. And as soon as he had driven on
again, Sandy crept down the tree and crawled right inside the mail-box.

Though he was not expecting a letter from anybody, he thought it would be
just as well to look and see if the man had left one for him.

Now, Sandy had never learned to read. And you might think it would do him
no good at all to look at the envelopes. But he soon came upon one which
he was sure was his. And the reason for that was that he had found an
envelope with the picture of a chipmunk in one corner of it!

That was enough for Sandy.

"I'm glad I came!" he said to himself. "Here's a letter for me! And how
surprised everybody will be!"

So he took the letter in his mouth and started down the tree.

The very first person he surprised was Farmer Green himself. He had
walked to the cross-roads from his house. And he had almost reached the
oak when he saw Sandy Chipmunk spring from the tree to the stone wall,
with a letter in his mouth, and scamper away.

Farmer Green ran after Sandy. And he threw stones at him. But Sandy
Chipmunk ran so fast that Farmer Green soon lost sight of him.

"I'd like to know what was in that letter," Farmer Green said, when he
told his family what had happened. "I'll have to warn the letter-carrier
to be sure to close the mail-box after this, for I can't have any more of
my letters stolen."

Johnnie Green couldn't help laughing, when he heard his father tell about
the chipmunk running away with a letter in his mouth.

[Illustration: "Here's a Letter for Me!" Said Sandy Chipmunk]

But Farmer Green didn't seem to see anything to laugh at.

"I only hope," he said, "the letter was nothing of importance."




XII

SANDY GETS A LETTER


After Sandy Chipmunk, with the letter in his mouth, escaped from Farmer
Green, he ran home and showed his letter to everybody he met. He felt
very proud.

"See!" he said. "There was a letter for me in the mail-box. It's lucky I
found it when I did, for I believe Farmer Green would have taken it if I
hadn't reached the box before him."

Old Mr. Crow laughed mockingly when Sandy called to him that he had a
letter.

"I see you _have_ one," Mr. Crow said. "But the question is, to whom does
it really belong? If the truth were known, I guess that letter rightfully
belongs to a farmer named Green."

That remark made Sandy angry.

"The letter belongs to me!" he told Mr. Crow. "Here's my picture on it.
You can see for yourself."

Now, Mr. Crow could not read either--for all he was so old. And when he
saw the picture of a chipmunk on the envelope, exactly like Sandy, he was
very much surprised.

"Why don't you open your letter?" he asked.

"I hadn't thought of that," Sandy replied. So he tore open the envelope
and pulled out a paper.

"It's certainly for me," he said, "for here's my picture again. But I'd
like to know why these other people have their pictures in _my_ letter.
They've no business in _my_ letter!"

Mr. Crow looked over Sandy's shoulder--which was not at all a polite
thing to do.

"That's queer!" Mr. Crow exclaimed. "There's one of the Red-Squirrel boys
and Mrs. Mouse's son. And this young chap here looks a lot like Rinaldo
Rat. ... I'd be pretty angry if anybody sent me a letter like that," Mr.
Crow then said.

Now, the real trouble with Mr. Crow was that he was jealous because Sandy
Chipmunk had a letter, while _he_ had none.

"I'd throw that letter away, if it was mine," remarked Mr. Crow. And he
said so much that at last Sandy Chipmunk tossed the letter away and went
off to hunt for birds' eggs.

As soon as Sandy was out of sight, Mr. Crow picked up the letter and flew
home with it.

He felt better--because at last he had a letter, while Sandy Chipmunk no
longer had one.

That very afternoon Farmer Green drove to the village. And on his way he
stopped at the houses of several of his neighbors, to talk about the
weather and the crops. And each one of them showed him a letter that had
come that day, telling all about a new kind of poison, to rid a farmer of
chipmunks and red squirrels and rats and mice.

"Sprinkle our powder around your corn-crib," the letter said, "and these
little rodents will trouble you no longer."

"I declare!" cried Farmer Green at last. "I seem to be the only person in
the neighborhood that didn't get one of those letters." Then he happened
to remember the letter Sandy Chipmunk had carried away in his mouth. "It
must have been that letter that the chipmunk stole out of my mail-box!"
Farmer Green said. And that night, when he reached home and told his
family about the letter, his son Johnnie laughed harder than ever.

"That must be a wise chipmunk!" Johnnie Green exclaimed. "I wish I could
catch him and put him in my squirrel cage."

"I wish he'd leave my mail alone," said Farmer Green. "The next thing we
know, he'll be taking my newspaper to read. And maybe he'll come right
into the house and borrow my spectacles."

Johnnie Green seemed to think his father was joking. And perhaps he was.

What do you think about it?




XIII

A RIDE TO THE MILLER'S


Do you know about the time Johnnie Green and his grandmother and Sandy
Chipmunk started for the miller's with a sack of wheat to be ground? If
you never heard the story, this is the way it happened--and if you _have_
heard it, it happened this way, just the same:

Farmer Green's wife had noticed that the flour in her flour-barrel was
getting low. So one morning Farmer Green pulled a wagon from under a shed
and set a big bag of wheat in it, behind the seat. Then he went into the
house to get a piece of string with which to tie the bag. Farmer Green
hadn't seen a pair of bright eyes that were watching him from the fence
near-by. And he didn't know that as soon as he started to cross the
barnyard, Sandy Chipmunk stole up to the wagon, climbed into it, and
crept inside the open bag of wheat.

Now, Sandy had not had his breakfast. So he began at once to eat heartily
of the wheat kernels, believing that after he had had a good meal it
would be time enough to think of carrying some of the wheat away to his
house. He only hoped that no one would take the bag away until he had
removed _all_ the wheat. There was enough of it--he was sure--to last him
for any number of winters.

Now, you must not think that Sandy was greedy, because he wanted all that
wheat. He intended all the time to leave the _bag_ for Farmer Green.

The wheat tasted so good that Sandy Chipmunk could think of nothing
else. So he never heard Johnnie Green's father when he came back from
the house. And before Sandy knew what was happening, Farmer Green had
reached into the wagon, drawn the mouth of the bag together, and tied it
hard and fast.

There was Sandy Chipmunk, inside the bag. And he was so frightened that
he couldn't eat another mouthful. He just shivered and shook, while
Farmer Green went into the barn, led out an old, slow horse called
Ebenezer, and harnessed him to the wagon.

Then Johnnie Green and his grandmother came out and seated themselves in
the wagon. Farmer Green gave Johnnie the reins; and Ebenezer started
jogging down the road toward the miller's, with Johnnie's old straw hat
and his grandmother's sunbonnet bobbing from side to side, and up and
down, and backwards and forwards, as the wagon jolted over ruts and
stones and thank-you-ma'ams--which were small ridges built across the
road, to turn the water into the ditch when it rained.

Cowering inside the bag, Sandy Chipmunk thought the earth was rocking,
for he had never ridden in a wagon before.

Although the sack was a stout one, Sandy could easily have gnawed his way
through it if he had not been too frightened to try. And there he stayed,
while all the time old Ebenezer kept plodding along toward the
grist-mill.

Johnnie Green and his grandmother, talking so near him, only alarmed
Sandy all the more. And he thought he could not be more scared than he
was. But all at once the wagon lurched forward and Grandmother Green
screamed. And Johnnie began to cry "Whoa! whoa!" in a loud voice.

Then Sandy Chipmunk began to shake harder than ever. He had no idea what
was happening.




XIV

A LUCKY ACCIDENT


It was really no wonder that Johnnie Green's grandmother screamed, when
she and Johnnie and Sandy Chipmunk were on their way to the miller's to
get the wheat ground into flour.

This was what made the good old lady scream: The ancient horse, Ebenezer,
was picking his way slowly down a steep hill, placing one foot carefully
in front of another, and taking pains not to step on the stones in the
road, so he wouldn't fall.

What happened was not Ebenezer's fault at all. You see, he was wearing an
old harness. And just as he was on the steepest part of the hill a strap
broke and the wagon rolled right upon his heels.

Now, many horses would have kicked and run, if such a thing had happened
to them. But even when Johnnie's grandmother screamed, old Ebenezer was
not at all frightened. And even when Johnnie cried "Whoa! whoa!" Ebenezer
did not stop. He thought he knew a good deal more about what he ought to
do than Johnnie Green did, for he had been pulling a wagon for almost
twenty years before Johnnie Green was born.

Johnnie tugged hard upon the reins. But still old Ebenezer went on
picking his way even more slowly. And he never stopped until he reached
the bottom of the hill. Then he stood stock still; and he looked around
at Johnnie Green, as if to say, "There, young man! I've brought you and
your grandma safe down that hill. And _now_ I'll let you get out of the
wagon, if you want to."

Well, Johnnie Green jumped down from his seat and looked at the harness.

"Dear me!" his grandmother said. "If we only had a piece of string you
could mend the harness so we could get to the miller's, at least."

Johnnie felt in all his pockets. And probably that was the first time he
had ever found himself without plenty of string. There were enough other
things in his pockets--a jackknife and nails, an apple and a lump of
maple sugar, an old broken watch and a willow whistle. But not a single
piece of string could Johnnie Green find.

Then he happened to think of the string his father had used to tie up the
sack of wheat. Johnnie stood the sack on end, tipped it against the back
of the seat, so the wheat wouldn't fall out, and unwound the string from
the mouth of the bag.

He had hardly begun to tie the harness together when Grandmother Green
screamed again.

The horse Ebenezer looked around once more, as if to say, "I wonder
what's come over the old lady."

And Johnnie Green turned his head, too.

"My goodness!" his grandmother said. "Did you see that? Something ran
right up my back and jumped off my shoulder. There it goes now!" She
pointed at a small object which was scurrying through the roadside fence.
"Why, it was a chipmunk, I do believe!" she cried. "Now, where do you
suppose he came from?"

Johnnie Green didn't know. And to tell the truth, he didn't much care.
You see, he felt very proud, mending the harness with nobody to help
him. And he was not interested in chipmunks just then.

So Sandy escaped. To be sure, he was so far from home that he didn't know
where he was. But he was so glad to get out of the sack of wheat that he
didn't worry about being lost. He thought he could find some one who
would know where Farmer Green's pasture was.




XV

THE ROWDY OF THE WOODS


One of the most quarrelsome of all Sandy Chipmunk's neighbors was Rowdy
Red-Squirrel. He was happiest when he was fighting. But perhaps that was
because he had never lost a fight. If Rowdy had had a sound beating,
maybe fighting would not have seemed so pleasant to him.

Ever since Rowdy whipped Frisky Squirrel, who (being a gray squirrel) was
bigger than he was, Rowdy bullied every squirrel in the neighborhood--no
matter what color he might be. As for chipmunks, Rowdy Red-Squirrel
boasted that he could whip six chipmunks at a time.

"That is, I could if they would stand still," he said. "Of course, if
they ran off in six different directions it might be a hard thing to do."

Rowdy was talking to Jasper Jay, who sat in a tree not far away. His
boasting amused Jasper. First Jasper smiled. Then he laughed aloud. And
after that he gave a hoarse shriek, which rang through the woods most
unpleasantly. At least, that was what Rowdy Red-Squirrel thought.

"What's the joke?" he asked.

"The joke?" Jasper answered. "Why--ha! ha!--_you_ are the joke! I don't
believe you can whip _one_ chipmunk. And when you talk of whipping _six_,
I can't help laughing."

"You wouldn't laugh if I could catch you," Rowdy Red-Squirrel growled.
And if he hadn't known that Jasper Jay would fly away, he would have
jumped into Jasper's tree and chased him.

"You mustn't expect me to believe you can whip _six_ until I've seen you
whip _one_," Jasper went on. "There's Sandy Chipmunk in that beech tree.
Why don't you steal over there and show me whether you can whip him?"

"I'll do it!" Rowdy cried. "Not that I find much pleasure in fighting a
single chipmunk--for I can whip _one_ with my hands tied behind me."

"Can you?" Jasper Jay asked. "Then let me see you tie your hands."

"I can't!" Rowdy Red-Squirrel replied. "Who ever heard of anybody who
could tie his own hands behind him?... _You_ will have to do that for
me," he said.

Jasper Jay gave another loud shriek and rocked back and forth on the limb
where he sat.

"Another joke!" he gasped--for he was too clever to be caught like that.
He had no idea of going near enough to Rowdy Red-Squirrel to tie his
hands behind his back.

"Well, I see I'll have to whip Sandy Chipmunk just as I am," Rowdy
grumbled. "It won't be much fun for me."

"I don't believe it will," Jasper Jay agreed.

"After I whip him, you'll have to find six more chipmunks for me, if you
want to see me fight them all at once," Rowdy Red-Squirrel told Jasper
Jay.

"I'll do it--if you whip Sandy," Jasper promised. And he laughed so hard
that he almost tumbled off the limb.




XVI

ROWDY RUNS AWAY


Rowdy Red-Squirrel jumped from one tree into another until he reached the
beech tree in which Jasper Jay had caught sight of Sandy Chipmunk.

Now, Sandy had not seen Rowdy stealing upon him. And the first he knew
about the fight was when he happened to turn around. Then he saw Rowdy
Red-Squirrel right in front of him. And before Sandy could move, Rowdy
had jumped straight at him.

Now, as you know, Sandy Chipmunk was not the most nimble of climbers. He
was a ground-squirrel; and though he often climbed into the lower
branches of trees, he always felt more comfortable on the top of a
rail-fence or a stone wall.

But Rowdy Red-Squirrel could cling to the smallest branch. The more it
swayed beneath his weight the better he liked it. His hardest battles had
been fought in the tree-tops. You see, he was never the least bit afraid
of falling.

Sandy Chipmunk was plucky--as you know. And at first he had no thought of
running away, when Rowdy Red-Squirrel jumped at him. Even when Rowdy sank
his sharp teeth into one of his ears, Sandy fought his hardest. But when
Rowdy pulled on his ear, Sandy's feet almost slipped off the limb.

Then Sandy tried to get away. And at last he tore his ear out of Rowdy
Red-Squirrel's mouth and scurried quickly to the ground.

Rowdy Red-Squirrel, dashing after him, shouted with glee.

"He's running away from me! I've whipped him!" he called to Jasper Jay,
who had come nearer, to see the fight.

Sandy Chipmunk had reached the stone wall between the woods and the
pasture. And he was still running. But the moment Rowdy Red-Squirrel
sprang upon the wall, to his great surprise Sandy whisked around and
jumped straight at _him_.

It was Rowdy's turn to be startled. And when Sandy gave his nose a cruel
bite Rowdy turned tail and darted off as fast as he could go.

After him dashed Sandy Chipmunk. No longer was he afraid of falling. He
was quite at home on the stone wall. He knew every stone in it, and every
nook and cranny. He knew exactly the best way to run along that old
wall. So all he had to think about now was catching Rowdy Red-Squirrel.

But Rowdy escaped. After he had run a long way he jumped into a tree and
climbed to the very top of it, where Sandy Chipmunk did not care to
follow him.

"Come down here, if you want to fight," Sandy called to him.

"You can't fool me," Rowdy answered. "The _other six of you_ are hiding
behind the wall. And the moment I came down you'd all jump at me again. I
said I could whip _six_ chipmunks. But _seven_ are one too many."

Sandy Chipmunk didn't know what Rowdy was talking about. And he could not
understand what made Jasper Jay laugh so loudly.

"You played a trick on me!" Rowdy told Jasper Jay. "You had six
chipmunks hidden behind that wall. And as soon as I came down where they
were, they all sprang at me. With Sandy Chipmunk, there were _seven_ of
them. And that's one too many."

"Ha! ha!" laughed Jasper Jay. "Yes! There's _one too many for you_. Sandy
Chipmunk is _one too many for you_!" And he flew away to tell the joke to
every one.

You see, Rowdy had been so frightened when Sandy turned and bit his nose
that he actually thought there must be at least seven chipmunks chasing
him.

Though he boasted just as much afterwards, Rowdy Red-Squirrel never
wanted to fight Sandy Chipmunk again.




XVII

CORN-PLANTING TIME


It was late in the spring. And Sandy Chipmunk couldn't help wishing it
was late in the fall instead. The reason for that was this: He could find
very little to eat anywhere in Pleasant Valley. It was too early for
fruit or nuts. It was even too early for many insects. And it seemed to
Sandy that all the insects flew much higher than they did when there were
plenty of other things to eat.

At last Sandy chanced to see Mr. Crow in the woods one day. Mr. Crow was
just about to fly somewhere. He seemed to be in a great hurry. In fact,
he did not want to stop to talk--which was most unusual with him.

"I can't chat with you to-day," Mr. Crow told Sandy. "I have business to
attend to. It's something I've been expecting for a long time. And I
don't want to be late."

"Where are you going?" Sandy asked.

"That--" said Mr. Crow--"that is something that doesn't concern you,
young man." And then he flapped his way through the woods and out of
sight.

Now, it happened that Sandy Chipmunk remembered at once what Uncle
Jerry Chuck had said a few days before. Uncle Jerry had said that Mr.
Crow had told him Farmer Green was about to plant corn. So Sandy
guessed that Mr. Crow was going to the field where Farmer Green and his
hired man were working.

"I'll run over there and see what's going on!" Sandy exclaimed. "If
they're planting corn I have just as much right to eat some as Mr.
Crow has."

Of course, Mr. Crow reached the ploughed field long before Sandy
Chipmunk. It took Mr. Crow no time at all to sail through the air and
drop down at a good, safe distance from where Farmer Green and his hired
man were planting corn. They had already planted several long rows. And
Mr. Crow at once set to work to scratch up the yellow kernels and swallow
them greedily.

He was enjoying his meal greatly when he caught sight of a small, striped
person busily engaged in doing the very same thing. It was Sandy
Chipmunk! And Mr. Crow hurried over to the row where Sandy was looking
for corn.

"What are you doing here?" Mr. Crow asked angrily.

"I might ask you the same question," Sandy answered.

"You followed me--that's what you did!" Mr. Crow exclaimed. "Of all the
prying busybodies I know, you are certainly the worst. This is not your
field; and I shall have to ask you to leave it at once."

"Oh! I'll leave the field," said Sandy Chipmunk. "I don't want the field.
You can have _that_. All I want is some of the corn. There ought to be
enough for both of us."

Mr. Crow muttered something about _impertinence_, which Sandy Chipmunk
didn't understand. Then Mr. Crow said:

"This corn belongs to Farmer Green. Just because I've come to help him,
and because I've scratched up a few of the kernels to see if he's
planting them properly, you seem to think I'm _eating corn_."

"I certainly do," said Sandy Chipmunk.

"Well, what an idea!" Mr. Crow exclaimed.

Strange as it may seem, Farmer Green had the same idea that Sandy
Chipmunk had. He happened to catch sight of old Mr. Crow. And pretty soon
Johnnie Green came hurrying up the field, along the fence. He hoped Mr.
Crow wouldn't see him.

But old Mr. Crow generally saw any one coming his way--especially if the
person happened to have a gun on his shoulder.

"I've important business over in the woods," he told Sandy Chipmunk
suddenly. And he flew off in great haste.

So Sandy stayed and ate all the corn he wanted. He was so small and so
nearly the same color as the ploughed field that Johnnie Green never saw
him at all.

After that Mr. Crow would scarcely speak to Sandy for several days. He
said that Sandy was a nuisance.

"A person can't go anywhere without that Chipmunk boy following him," Mr.
Crow complained. "You know, I'm helping Farmer Green plant his corn. And
Sandy Chipmunk followed me to the corn-patch. And what do you think? He
actually began to _eat_ the corn! Now, who ever heard of such a thing?"

But Mr. Crow fooled nobody but himself. Every one knew that he ate more
of Farmer Green's corn than anybody else unless it was Farmer Green. And
_he_ always waited until it was ripe.

The trouble with Mr. Crow was this: He didn't want any one but himself to
visit the cornfield. He wanted all the corn for an old gentleman known as
_Mr. Crow_.




XVIII

SANDY LIKES MILK


Sandy Chipmunk liked milk. He never knew it, though, until he chanced to
come upon a saucerful which some one had set out on the big flat stone
that served as the back doorstep of the farmhouse.

Sandy crept up and sniffed at the white liquid in the saucer. It smelled
very good. So he tasted it. And it tasted so much better, even, than it
smelled that he drank every drop of it.

Sandy was sitting on the big stone step, washing his face, when Farmer
Green's cat leaped out of the doorway.

The cat was very angry. And it was no wonder, because Sandy Chipmunk had
drunk her breakfast. She seemed to think that since Sandy had made away
with her breakfast it would be only fair if she should make away with
_him_.

[Illustration: Farmer Green's Cat Leaped Out of the Doorway]

But Sandy did not agree with her at all. Though he had washed only one
side of his face, he jumped sideways off the step and ran and hid in the
woodpile close by.

You might think he would have had to stay there a long time. For the old
cat crouched down and watched the hole into which Sandy had crawled. She
seemed to have made up her mind to wait there until Sandy came out of
that hole again.

If she had waited for that to happen she would have been there yet. For
Sandy crept through the woodpile, stole out the other side of it, and ran
home.

He was glad to get away from the cat. But he was sorry there wasn't more
of that delicious drink which he had found in the saucer.

Later that day Sandy told Fatty Coon what had happened.

"I know what that was," Fatty Coon exclaimed. "It was milk."

"I wonder where Farmer Green gets it," Sandy said.

"From the cows, of course!" Fatty replied.

"You don't say so!" Sandy Chipmunk cried. "I'm glad to know it." And he
scampered off across the pasture, toward three of Farmer Green's cows
which were chewing their cuds under the shade of a big maple tree.

When Sandy asked them if they would please give him some milk to drink
two of the cows (they were the good-natured ones) only smiled at each
other. But the third cow (a surly old creature with long, sharp horns)
told him not to be silly.

Well, Sandy Chipmunk saw that he could get no milk there. And he was
feeling quite downcast when he chanced to meet Henry Skunk, to whom he
told his troubles.

"Of course the cows couldn't give you any milk!" Henry Skunk said. "It's
not milking time yet. So what could they do? You go down to the barnyard
late this afternoon and you'll find all the milk you could drink in a
thousand years."

Sandy Chipmunk thanked him. And somehow he managed to wait until the
afternoon was almost gone. Then he skipped down the hill to Farmer
Green's barn. He thought it must be milking time, because Johnnie Green
and old dog Spot had driven all the cows home.




XIX

WHAT THE OLD COW DID


When Sandy Chipmunk reached Farmer Green's barn he crept inside and
looked all around. He had expected to find the barn crowded with saucers
full of milk. But not a single saucer did he see. There were two long
rows of cows stabled in the barn. And Sandy noticed Farmer Green and his
boy and his hired man, each sitting on a low stool beside a cow. They
were milking the cows. But Sandy did not know it.

He began to think that Henry Skunk had played a trick on him. And he was
about to leave the barn when he turned to look at several bright tin
pails standing on the floor.

Sandy crept up to one of them and sniffed at it. He was glad that he had
done that, for he smelled _milk_. There was no mistake about it.

Sandy Chipmunk couldn't crawl up the side of the pail, it was so smooth
and slippery. So he jumped right up and stood on its edge. And looking
inside, he saw that the pail was almost full of milk. He knew then that
Henry Skunk had told the truth.

By bending down Sandy was just able to reach the milk. And he began
drinking it as fast as he could. It was so delicious that he forgot all
about Johnnie Green and his father and the hired man.

With his head inside the pail, of course Sandy couldn't see what happened
in the barn. The more he drank, the further down he had to stretch his
neck. And when at last he heard a shout, and a milking-stool came sailing
through the air not far above the pail, Sandy was so startled that he
lost his balance and went _plump_! into the milk.

Luckily, Sandy Chipmunk knew how to swim. So he managed to keep his nose
in the air or he would certainly have drowned.

"Where on earth did that chipmunk go?" he heard Johnnie Green say as he
picked up his stool. You see, Johnnie never once thought of looking
inside the pail.

Still, Sandy Chipmunk was in a fix. For the inside of the pail was as
smooth and slippery as the outside. And of course he couldn't _jump_ out,
for there was nothing from which he could spring.

Now it happened that the pail of milk stood not far behind the surly old
cow that had told Sandy not to be silly, when he asked her for some milk
to drink, in the pasture that day. Johnnie Green's shouting and the stool
hurtling through the air displeased her. And since she was not the sort
to hide her ill nature, she promptly kicked the milkpail over.

For a moment Sandy Chipmunk thought that this time the end of the world
had certainly come. The old cow's foot crashed against the pail and sent
it flying against the stone wall on which the barn was built. And Sandy
tumbled out upon the floor in a sea of milk.

He didn't wait to learn exactly what had happened. For as soon as he
could scramble to his feet he dashed out of the barn and tore across the
fields towards the pasture.

Later, when he reached his house and sat down to rest, he soon forgot
his fright. For he had a very pleasant time licking himself clean. That
was the way Sandy Chipmunk always made himself spick and span. And though
there may be some people who would not consider such an act to be in the
best of taste, Sandy Chipmunk thought what was left of the milk _tasted
very good_. And since his mother did not object to what he was doing,
perhaps no one else ought to.


THE END










End of Project Gutenberg's The Tale of Sandy Chipmunk, by Arthur Scott Bailey

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALE OF SANDY CHIPMUNK ***

***** This file should be named 9462.txt or 9462.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/4/6/9462/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
