The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Tale of Old Mr. Crow, by Arthur Scott
Bailey


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: The Tale of Old Mr. Crow

Author: Arthur Scott Bailey

Release Date: December 21, 2004  [eBook #14402]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALE OF OLD MR. CROW***


E-text prepared by Juliet Sutherland, Mary Meehan, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team



Tuck-me-in Tales

THE TALE OF OLD MR. CROW

by

ARTHUR SCOTT BAILEY

Author of "Sleepy-Time Tales"

1917







CONTENTS

CHAPTER

     I  THE OUTLAW

    II  SOMETHING LOST

   III  THE GIANT SCARECROW

    IV  CAUGHT NAPPING

     V  A GREAT DISAPPOINTMENT

    VI  MR. CROW IN TROUBLE

   VII  MR. CROW'S BAD MEMORY

  VIII  THE NEW UMBRELLA

    IX  CAUGHT IN THE RAIN

     X  A QUEER TOADSTOOL

    XI  MR. CROW'S PLAN

   XII  A RACE WITH THE TRAIN

  XIII  THE GAME OF CHECKERS

   XIV  THE LUCKY LAUGH

    XV  MR. CROW'S NEW COAT

   XVI  A TIGHT FIT

  XVII  THE STRANGE BUTTONS

 XVIII  AN UNLUCKY NUMBER

   XIX  THE SHOE-STORE

    XX  OLD SHOES FOR NEW

   XXI  THE CROW CAUCUS

  XXII  THE TEST

 XXIII  THE WHITE FLAG






I

THE OUTLAW


A good many of the forest-people claimed that old Mr. Crow was an
outlaw. They said he was always roving about, robbing Farmer Green of
his corn and his chickens, and digging up the potatoes when they shot
their sprouts above the surface of the potato-patch. And everybody was
aware that the old gentleman stole eggs from the nests of his smaller
neighbors. It was even whispered that Mr. Crow had been known to devour
baby robins.

But perhaps some of the things said of him were not true. Though if he
really was an outlaw he seemed to enjoy being one. He usually laughed
whenever Johnnie Green or his father tried to catch him, or when they
attempted to frighten him. And on the whole he was quite the boldest,
noisiest, and most impertinent of all the creatures that lived in
Pleasant Valley.

His house stood in a tall elm, not too far from the cornfield. And those
that dwelt near him never could complain that the neighborhood was
quiet.... It was never quiet where old Mr. Crow was.

Many of the smaller birds feared him. But they couldn't help laughing at
him sometimes--he was so droll, with his solemn face, his sedate walk,
and his comical gestures. As for his voice, it was loud and harsh. And
those that heard too much of it often wished that he would use it less.

Mr. Crow's best friends sometimes remarked that people did not
understand him. They said that he helped Farmer Green more than he
injured him, for he did a great deal in the way of eating beetles,
cutworms and grasshoppers, as well as many other insects that tried
to destroy Farmer Green's crops. So you see he had his good points,
as well as his bad ones.

For a number of years Mr. Crow had spent each summer in Pleasant Valley,
under the shadow of Blue Mountain. He usually arrived from the South in
March and left in October. And though many of his friends stayed in the
North and braved the winter's cold and storms, old Mr. Crow was too fond
of a good meal to risk going hungry after the snow lay deep upon the
ground. At that season, such of his neighbors as remained behind often
dined upon dried berries, which they found clinging to the trees and
bushes. But so long as Mr. Crow could go where it was warmer, and find
sea food along the shore, he would not listen to his friends' pleas
that he spend the winter with them.

"Until I can no longer travel 'as the crow flies,' I shall not spend a
winter here," he would say to them with a solemn wink. That was one of
his favorite jokes. He had heard that when anybody asked Farmer Green how
far it was to the village he always answered, "It's nine miles as the
crow flies"--meaning that it was nine miles in a straight line.

Old Mr. Crow thought that the saying was very funny. But then, he usually
laughed at Farmer Green, no matter what he said or did.

You can see that Mr. Crow was no respecter of persons.




II

SOMETHING LOST


It may seem a strange thing for old Mr. Crow to have had no other
name--such as John, or James, or Josephus. But that was the way he
preferred it to be. Indeed, his parents had given him another name,
years before. But Mr. Crow did not like it. And after he grew up he
dropped the name. To tell the truth, the reason for his coming to
Pleasant Valley, in the beginning, was because no one knew him there.
And though his new friends thought it odd that he should be called
simply "Mr. Crow," he was satisfied.

Of course, that was when he was younger. As the years passed he became
known as "old Mr. Crow." But no one called him that except behind his
back. And since he knew nothing of that, it never annoyed him in the
least.

Now, Mr. Crow had spent a good many pleasant seasons in Pleasant Valley.
And nobody had ever found out much about him. But at last there came a
day when he was very much upset. He was roaming through the woods on a
sunny afternoon when someone called to him.

He stopped. And presently a person in a bright blue coat came hurrying
up. It was a noisy fellow known as Jasper Jay, who was new in the
neighborhood.

"I thought I recognized you," he shouted to Mr. Crow. "As soon as I saw
you fly past I said to myself, 'That looks like Cousin--'"

Mr. Crow stopped him just in time. It was true that the two were cousins.
One look at their big feet and their big bills would have told you that.

Now, Mr. Crow sometimes saw Jasper on the trips he made each fall and
spring. And Jasper knew Mr. Crow's name. He had almost said it, too, at
the top of his boisterous voice.

"What's the matter?" Jasper Jay inquired, for Mr. Crow was looking all
around. "Have you lost anything?"

"Yes!" said Mr. Crow. "I've lost my name. And I don't want to find it
again, either."

What he was really doing was this: He was peering about to see whether
anybody might be listening.

Jasper Jay's mouth fell open--he was so astonished.

"Why, what do you mean, Cousin--"

Mr. Crow stopped him again.

"Don't call me that!" he said severely. "I'm known here as 'Mr. Crow.'
And I'll thank you to call me by that name and no other."

That astonished Jasper Jay all the more, because he had never known Mr.
Crow to thank anybody for anything.

"Well, well!" he murmured faintly. And then it was Mr. Crow's turn to be
surprised, for he had never before heard his cousin Jasper speak in
anything but the loudest scream.

Then Mr. Crow explained that he had never liked the name his parents had
given him and that he wanted nobody in Pleasant Valley to learn what it
was.

"You must promise me," said Mr. Crow--and there was a dangerous glitter
in his eye--"you must promise me that you'll never speak my name again."

"Why, certainly!" Jasper Jay replied. "I'm glad to oblige you, I'm sure.
And I promise that I'll never, never, never again mention your name
aloud, Cousin Jim."

There! The secret is out! Jasper Jay said Mr. Crow's name without once
thinking what he was about. And Mr. Crow was so angry that he gave his
cousin a sound beating, on the spot.

"I'll teach you," he said, "to do as you're told!" And he did. For after
that Jasper Jay always remembered that to him, as to everybody else, his
big black cousin must be known only as "Mr. Crow."

You see, "Jim Crow" was a name that Mr. Crow could not abide. The mere
sound of it made him wince. And he was not a person of tender feelings,
either.




III

THE GIANT SCARECROW


Farmer Green always claimed that Mr. Crow was a ruffian and a robber.

"That old chap has been coming here every summer for years," he said to
his son Johnnie one day. "I always know him when I see him, because he's
the biggest of all the crows that steal my corn."

That was Farmer Green's way of looking at a certain matter. But old Mr.
Crow regarded it otherwise. He knew well enough what Farmer Green thought
of his trick of digging up the newly planted corn. And his own idea and
Farmer Green's did not agree at all.

Now, this matter was something that old Mr. Crow never mentioned unless
somebody else spoke of it first. And then Mr. Crow would shake his head
slowly, and sigh, and say:

"It's strange that Farmer Green doesn't understand how much I help him.
I'm as busy as I can be all summer long, destroying insects that injure
his crops. And since I help Farmer Green to raise his corn, I'm sure I
have as good a right to a share of it as the horses that plough the
field, or the men that hoe it. Farmer Green gives them corn to eat.
But he never once thinks of giving me any."

You see, there are always two sides to every question. And that was Mr.
Crow's. But Farmer Green never knew how Mr. Crow felt about the matter.
And every spring, at corn-planting time, he used to set up scarecrows
in his cornfield, hoping that they would frighten the crows away.

And so they did. At least, some of the younger crows were afraid of those
straw-stuffed dummies, with their hats tipped over their faces, or upon
one side, and their empty sleeves flapping in the winds that swept
through the valley. But old Mr. Crow was too wise to be fooled so easily.
He would scratch up the corn at the very feet of a scarecrow--and chuckle
at the same time.

It must not be supposed that Farmer Green did not know what was going
on. He often caught sight of Mr. Crow in the cornfield. But it always
happened that Mr. Crow saw him too. And Farmer Green could never get
near the old rogue.

At last Johnnie Green's father spent a whole evening trying to think of
some way in which to outwit Mr. Crow. And by bedtime he had hit upon a
plan that he liked.

The next day, with Johnnie to help him, he set to work to build a monster
scarecrow. It was twice as high as the tallest man that was ever seen.
And for a hat Farmer Green set on its straw head a huge tin pan, which
glittered when the sun shone upon it.

"That'll fix him!" said Farmer Green, as he stood off and looked at the
giant. And as for his son Johnnie, he danced up and down and shouted--he
was so pleased.

But Mr. Crow was not pleased when he flew toward the cornfield the next
day and saw the great figure of a man there, with a terrible glittering
helmet upon his head. And Mr. Crow noticed something upon the giant's
shoulder that looked very like a gun.

The old gentleman swerved quickly to one side and never stopped his
flight until he had reached the woods.

And that night Farmer Green felt quite merry.

"I've scared that old crow away at last," he said.




IV

CAUGHT NAPPING


It was several days before Mr. Crow stopped sulking. He was very angry
with Farmer Green for placing the giant in the cornfield. And he told his
friends that he had about made up his mind he would move to some other
neighborhood.

"Farmer Green will be sorry after I'm gone," he remarked. "He'll miss me
when he finds that his crops are being eaten by mildreds of insects."
Whether he meant _millions_ or _hundreds_ it would be hard to say. You
see, Mr. Crow was not good at arithmetic. He always had trouble counting
higher than ten.

And then, the very day before he had planned to move, Mr. Crow noticed
something that made him change his mind. He was sitting in the top of a
tall pine, looking mournfully across the cornfield, where he dared not
go, when he saw a small bird drop down upon the giant's head and
disappear.

"He's eaten her!" Mr. Crow exclaimed. But as he stared, the little bird
appeared again and flew away.

Old Mr. Crow knew it was a mother wren; and he was not long in
discovering that she had built a nest under the tin pan that the giant
wore in place of a hat!

That was enough for Mr. Crow. The secret was out! The thing he had feared
was nothing worse than a straw scarecrow, with a stick stuck over its
shoulder to look like a gun.

The old gentleman felt quite foolish for a time. But he did not let that
fact prevent his scratching up enough corn to make up for the meals he
had lost.

After that he quickly recovered his spirits. And he forgot all about
moving.

But if Mr. Crow felt merry, you may be sure that Farmer Green did not.
It was his turn to feel foolish. And he vowed that he would get even with
Mr. Crow, if it took him all summer.

Meanwhile, Mr. Crow grew careless. He really thought that Farmer Green
wouldn't be able to think of any other way of keeping him out of the
cornfield. And he spent so much of his time there that he grew quite fat.
He became somewhat short-breathed, too. And his voice grew wheezier than
ever. But Mr. Crow did not mind those things. He was getting all the corn
he could eat. And he was happy.

Then there came a morning at last, as he soared down upon the cornfield,
when he noticed that the huge scarecrow was gone. There was another--a
shorter--figure in its place. But to careless Mr. Crow's glance it
seemed no different from the scarecrows he had known all his life. He
paid little or no attention to the image. It wore the big pan upon its
head--he observed that much. And it made him laugh.

Then Mr. Crow began to scratch for his breakfast. But he had not eaten a
single kernel when a terrible roar broke the early morning stillness. And
there was a sound as of hail falling all around him.

Mr. Crow knew right away what had happened. The scarecrow had come to
life and tried to shoot him! And if ever a bird hurried away from that
field, it was old Mr. Crow.

It was almost night before he remembered that he had had nothing to eat
all day. And so anybody can see how frightened he was....

Farmer Green walked home to his own breakfast with his gun resting upon
his shoulder.

"I didn't get him," he told Johnnie. "But I must have scared him out of a
year's growth."




V

A GREAT DISAPPOINTMENT


After Farmer Green came so near shooting him, Mr. Crow lost his taste for
corn for a whole year. He was afraid it would never come back to him. And
he worried so much that he grew quite thin and his feathers began to look
rusty. His friends were somewhat alarmed about his health, many of them
saying that if they were in Mr. Crow's place they would be careful.

Now, strange as it may seem, that was exactly Mr. Crow's trouble. He was
too careful! He was always on the lookout for a gun, or a trap. And being
constantly on guard was bad for his nerves.

Luckily, a winter spent in the South did a great deal to improve Mr.
Crow's health, as well as his state of mind. When he came back to
Pleasant Valley the following March he told his cousin Jasper Jay
that he really felt he would be able to eat corn again.

As the spring lengthened, that feeling grew upon Mr. Crow. And when
planting-time arrived the black rascal had his old look again.

It was a very solemn look--unless you regarded him closely. But it was a
very sly, knowing look if you took the pains to stare boldly into his
eye.

Farmer Green would have liked to do that, because then he might have
caught old Mr. Crow. As it happened, he did _catch sight_ of Mr. Crow the
very first day he began to plant his corn.

"I declare--there's that old crow again!" he exclaimed. "He's come back
to bother me once more. But maybe I'm smarter than he thinks!"

Mr. Crow knew better than to come too near the men who were working in
the cornfield. He just sat on the fence on the further side of the road
and watched them for a while. And he was getting hungrier every minute.
But he had no chance to scratch up any corn that day.

The next day, however, the men had moved further down the field. Mr. Crow
had been waiting for that. He flew to the edge of the ploughed ground,
which they had planted the afternoon before, and dug up a kernel of corn.

He didn't stop to look at it. He knew it was corn--just by the feeling of
it. And it was inside his mouth in a twinkling.

And in another twinkling it was outside again--for Mr. Crow did not like
the taste at all.

"That's a bad one!" he remarked. And then he tried another kernel--and
another--and another. But they were all like the first one.

Thereupon, Mr. Crow paused and looked at the corn. And he saw at once
that there was something wrong. The kernels were gray, instead of a
golden yellow. He pecked at one of them and found that the gray coating
hid something black and sticky.

That was tar, though Mr. Crow did not know it. And the gray covering was
wood-ashes, in which Farmer Green had rolled the corn after dipping it in
tar. The tar made the corn taste bad. And the wood-ashes kept it from
sticking to one's fingers.

"This is a great disappointment," said Mr. Crow very solemnly. "Of all
the mean tricks that Farmer Green has played on me, this is by far the
meanest. It would serve him right if I went away and never caught a
single grasshopper or cutworm all summer."

But there were two reasons that prevented Mr. Crow's leaving Pleasant
Valley. He liked his old home. And he liked grasshoppers and cutworms,
too. So he stayed until October. And the strange part of it was that he
never once discovered that Farmer Green had planted tarred corn only in a
border around the field. Inside that border the corn was of the good, old
yellow kind that Mr. Crow liked.

And so, for once, Farmer Green out-witted old Mr. Crow.

By the end of the summer his corn had grown so tall and borne so many big
ears that Farmer Green took some of it to the county fair. And everybody
who saw it there said that it was the finest corn that ever was seen in
those parts.




VI

MR. CROW IN TROUBLE


After Mr. Crow found that Farmer Green had put tar on his corn, Mr. Crow
was so angry that he flew for a good many miles before stopping. And
then, as he started to walk along the limb that lead to his house in the
tall elm, he noticed for the first time that he could hardly move his
right foot.

He looked down and he was startled when he saw that his foot was many
times its usual size. Moreover, it did not look like a foot at all, being
a strange, huge, shapeless thing.

Old Mr. Crow was alarmed. Never in all his life had he found himself in
such a plight. He stayed at home only long enough to tie his foot up in a
bandage, which made it look bigger than ever. And then he hurried off as
fast as he could fly to call upon Aunt Polly Woodchuck, who was said to
be an excellent doctor.

Aunt Polly was at home. And since Mr. Crow could not crawl inside her
house, she received him in her dooryard.

As soon as she looked at Mr. Crow's foot Aunt Polly Woodchuck threw up
both her hands.

"You have gout!" she cried. "And it's the worst case I ever saw."

That made Mr. Crow feel proud and happy.

"What about a cure?" he inquired. "I shouldn't like to have my foot like
this always. If you could cure it in a week I would be satisfied. But I
want at least a week in which to show my foot to my friends."

"You'll be lucky if you're better in a month," said Aunt Polly Woodchuck.
"You must be very careful about what you eat. You may have all the
ginseng and Jimson weed and elecampane that you wish. And drink plenty of
catnip tea! But until you're quite well again, don't touch corn,
grasshoppers, birds' eggs, field-mice, or elderberries. If you eat such
things your other foot may swell. And then you'd be unable to walk at
all."

Mr. Crow was no longer happy.

"Those are the things I like best--the last that you mentioned," he said.
"And the food you tell me I may have is exactly the kind I've never cared
for in the least. As for catnip tea, I can't swallow it!" he groaned.
"Haven't you some other remedy? Can't you give me a pill?"

But Aunt Polly Woodehuck said there was no other way.

"I never can remember what you've told me," Mr. Crow objected.

"I can fix that," said Aunt Polly. And then she went into her house,
returning presently with a basket. From the basket she drew forth a
handful of herbs, which she gave to Mr. Crow.

"Take these," she said, "and put them in your right-hand pocket. These
are what you may eat--a sample of each herb."

Straightway she gave Mr. Crow two more handfuls of food.

"And here," she continued, "here are things you mustn't eat. Put them in
your left-hand pocket. And at dinner time to-night you won't have the
least bit of trouble knowing what you're allowed to have."

Mr. Crow thanked her politely. But he felt somewhat angry, just the same.
He saw that he was going to have a very unpleasant time. For if there was
one thing that Mr. Crow liked, it was good food--and plenty of it.




VII

MR. CROW'S BAD MEMORY


It was true, as Mr. Crow had said, that he had a bad memory. By the time
he reached home he had forgotten almost everything the famous doctor,
Aunt Polly Woodchuck, had said to him. About all Mr. Crow could recall of
their talk was that Aunt Polly had told him his swollen foot was caused
by gout; and that she had given him samples of such food as he might eat,
and also such as he mightn't.

He had put the two kinds in different pockets, just as Aunt Polly had
suggested. And all he had to do when he was hungry was to look into his
pockets and see what food he might safely choose for his meal. Well, Mr.
Crow was hungry as a bear by the time he reached his house. And the
first thing he did was to feel in his left-hand pocket. He drew forth a
kernel of corn.

"Good!" he cried. "That's exactly what I'd like for my dinner. And if
Farmer Green hadn't tarred his corn before planting it I know exactly
where I'd go." Then he thought deeply for a few minutes. "I'll go over
to the corn-crib and see if I can't find some corn on the ground!" he
exclaimed a little later. While he was thinking he ate the sample of
corn, without once noticing what he did.

So Mr. Crow flew swiftly to the farm-yard. It happened that there was
nobody about. And, luckily, Mr. Crow found enough corn scattered near the
door of the corn-crib to furnish him with a good dinner.

The next morning, as soon as it began to grow light (for Mr. Crow was an
early riser), he felt in his left-hand pocket once more. And he pulled
out an elderberry.

"That won't do!" he said. "It's too early in the season for
elderberries." But he ate the sample--though he found it rather dry,
for it was a last year's berry. And then he fished a bird's egg out
of the same pocket. "My favorite breakfast!" he remarked. He ate the
egg. And at once he started out to hunt for more. Some people say that
he robbed the nests of several small birds before he had breakfast
enough.

Mr. Crow then proceeded to pass the morning very pleasantly, by making
calls on his friends. He enjoyed their surprise at seeing his bandaged
foot.

"I've the worst case of gout Aunt Polly Woodchuck has ever seen," he told
every one with an air of pride.

When lunch time came, it found Mr. Crow with a hearty appetite. And once
more he felt in his left-hand pocket to see what he might have for his
meal.

He pulled out a squirming field-mouse. Mr. Crow was about to eat him; but
the mouse slipped away and hid in a hollow stump. So Mr. Crow lost him.
Then he went soaring off across the pasture. And when he came home again
he didn't seem hungry at all. Whatever he may have found to eat, it
seemed to satisfy him.

By this time Mr. Crow had quite recovered from the fear that had seized
him when he first discovered his swollen foot. And before he went to
sleep that night he thought he would take the bandage off his foot and
look at it. He had some trouble in removing the bandage. And when he
had succeeded in unwinding it he could hardly believe his eyes. His foot
was its natural size again!

Old Mr. Crow looked at the bandage. And he saw, clinging to it, a mass of
caked mud. He could not understand that.

"Anyhow, I'm cured," he said sadly. He was disappointed, because there
were still a good many of his friends to whom he had not yet shown his
bandaged foot. "I don't consider that Aunt Polly Woodchuck is as good a
doctor as people say," Mr. Crow grumbled. "Here she's gone and cured my
foot almost a week before I wanted her to!"

And the next day he went over to see the old lady and complain about her
mistake.

"What have you been eating?" she asked Mr. Crow.

He told her.

"Ah!" said Aunt Polly. "It's your mistake--and not mine. You ate what
was in your _left-hand pocket_, instead of what was in the right-hand
one. If you had followed my instructions everything would have been all
right."

Old Mr. Crow felt very much ashamed. There was nothing he could say. So
he slunk away and moped for three days.

Though he did not know it, the trouble with his foot was simply this: He
had daubed so much tar on his foot, in Farmer Green's cornfield, that the
soft earth had stuck to it in a big ball.

Mr. Crow recovered his spirits at last. And neither he nor Aunt Polly
Woodchuck ever discovered that he never had gout at all. He forgave her,
at last, for having cured his foot too quickly, for the affair gave him
something to talk about for a long time afterward. He never tired of
telling his friends about the trouble he had had.

But many of the feathered folk in Pleasant Valley grew very weary of the
tale before they heard the last of it.




VIII

THE NEW UMBRELLA


Old Mr. Crow was feeling very happy, because he had a new umbrella--the
only umbrella that was owned for miles around. And wherever Mr. Crow
went, the umbrella went too, tucked snugly under his wing.

There was only one thing that could have made Mr. Crow feel any happier;
and that was rain. As soon as it rained he intended to spread the
umbrella over his head and go to call upon all of his friends.

But not a drop of rain had fallen for weeks. And so far as old Mr.
Crow could judge, there wasn't a single sign of a storm anywhere.
Nevertheless, he continued to carry his umbrella every time he stirred
away from his house. And although the weather was so dry, he found a
good deal of pleasure in showing his umbrella to his neighbors.

Now, old Mr. Crow had a cousin of whom you have heard. His name was
Jasper Jay; and he was a great dandy. He always took pride in his
handsome blue suit, of which he was very vain.

Being an inquisitive fellow, Jasper Jay was much interested in Mr. Crow's
umbrella. Whenever he met Mr. Crow he asked the old gentleman to spread
the umbrella; and once Mr. Crow had let Jasper hold it for as long as ten
seconds, "just to see how it felt."

After that Jasper Jay could not get the umbrella out of his mind. He
began calling at Mr. Crow's house every day; and all the time he was
there he never took his eyes off the umbrella.

At last the two cousins met in the woods one day. As usual, Mr. Crow had
his umbrella tucked under his wing. But when Jasper asked him to spread
it, Mr. Crow refused.

"I can't keep putting my umbrella up and down," he said. "If I did, the
first thing I knew it would be worn out; and then what would happen to me
if it should rain?"

"You'd get wet," said Jasper Jay.

"Exactly!" Mr. Crow replied. "And at my age I might take cold and be very
ill, perhaps."

"Where are you going?" Jasper inquired pleasantly. He was disappointed;
but he did not let his cousin see that.

"I'm on my way to a big meeting of the Crow family," the old gentleman
replied.

"And you're taking your umbrella?" Jasper asked, as if he were greatly
astonished.

"Why--yes!" Mr. Crow answered. "You seem surprised."

"I am," said Jasper Jay with a sad shake of his head. "I'd hate to risk
it, if I were you. There'll be some rough young fellows there and you're
likely to lose your umbrella. I'm afraid they'll take it away from you."

Old Mr. Crow looked worried.

"I don't know what to do," he said anxiously. "It's an important meeting.
They're expecting me. And I'm late, as it is. If I go back home and leave
my umbrella I'm afraid they'll think I'm not coming."

"I suppose I could help you just this once," Jasper Jay remarked. "Of
course, it's not a thing I'd do for everybody. But since you're my
cousin, if you want me to do it I'll take care of your umbrella until
you come back again."

"Will you wait right here?" Mr. Crow asked him.

"Yes!"

"Will you promise not to spread the umbrella?"

At that question Jasper Jay's face fell. But pretty soon he said
cheerfully:

"I promise not to put it up--unless it should rain."

Mr. Crow looked carefully at the sky. There was not a cloud to be seen.
So he turned to Jasper Jay with a smile and placed the umbrella carefully
in his hands.

Then Mr. Crow flew away.

"It certainly can't rain," he said to himself.

Mr. Crow arrived at the meeting quite out of breath. And his friends
noticed that he seemed uneasy about something. He kept looking up at
the sky and asking everybody what he thought about the weather.




IX

CAUGHT IN THE RAIN


Left alone in the woods with Mr. Crow's umbrella, Jasper Jay had a fine
time. First he looked at the umbrella very closely, from the handle to
the slender tip. Then he placed it under his wing and strutted back and
forth upon the ground, just as he had seen Mr. Crow parade before his
friends. And Jasper wished that someone would come along and see him.

But nobody came. So after a while he grew tired of wishing. And the
next thing he did was to unfasten the strap that kept the folds of the
umbrella wrapped about its stick.

"I'm not putting it up," he told himself. "I didn't promise I wouldn't do
this. I only agreed not to spread the umbrella unless it rained."

Just then a low rumble caught his ear.

"That's thunder!" he cried. "I do hope it will rain!"

In a short time the sky grew dark. And pretty soon great drops came
pattering down upon the leaves over Jasper's head.

"Hurrah!" he shouted. And then he flew straight up to the very top of a
tall tree, where he perched himself on a limb and spread Mr. Crow's
umbrella.

Though it was soon raining hard, the rain did not fall any too heavily to
please Jasper Jay. He enjoyed the pleasant-sounding patter over his head.
And he liked to watch the trickle of the water as it ran off the umbrella
and fell upon the leaves beneath him.

Now, while Jasper Jay was having a good time, there was one person who
was not enjoying the shower at all--and that was old Mr. Crow. You
remember that he had gone to a crows' meeting. And as soon as it began to
sprinkle the meeting broke up. Old Mr. Crow was the first one to leave;
and he was in a great hurry. He wished he had not left his umbrella with
Jasper Jay, for he did not want anybody but himself to use it--especially
for the first time. As you know, ever since Mr. Crow had owned his
umbrella it had not rained once.

That was why the old gentleman flew away without even stopping to bid his
friends good-by. He flew as fast as he could, through the pelting rain.
And he had just come in sight of the woods where Jasper had promised to
wait for him when the rain suddenly stopped.

As Mr. Crow dropped downward he saw something in a tree-top that made him
very angry. It was his umbrella, wide open. And beneath it--though Mr.
Crow could not see him--was Jasper Jay.

He was trembling with rage--was Mr. Crow--as he alighted on a limb near
his cousin.

"Here, you!" the old gentleman cried. "Put down my umbrella! It's not
raining. How dare you sit there with my umbrella spread over your head?"

Jasper Jay closed the umbrella quickly and handed it to Mr. Crow with a
smile.

"That's a good umbrella," he remarked. "As you see, I'm not even damp.
But you--ha! ha!--_you_ seem to have been caught out in a heavy shower."

Mr. Crow was dripping. His tail feathers looked quite bedraggled. And he
was shaking the drops off his wings.

"It will never happen again," Mr. Crow said hoarsely. "Never again will
I go anywhere, rain or shine, without my umbrella. At my age it's very
dangerous to get so wet."

"I'd advise you to run through the woods, and then run back again, until
you get warm," Jasper Jay suggested. "And since you're my cousin, if you
want me to do it I'll help you--and hold your umbrella for you until you
return."

But Mr. Crow shook his head.

"I've had enough of your advice," he said sourly. "It might rain again;
and then I'd be worse off than ever."

Jasper Jay pretended to be surprised. And he, too, began to tremble and
shake. But it was only because he was laughing silently at his cousin.




X

A QUEER TOADSTOOL


Mr. Crow did exactly as he said he would. After the time he was caught
out in the shower and got wet he never went even the shortest distance
away from home without his umbrella. And he wouldn't even let anybody
take his umbrella, in order to look at it.

"It might rain suddenly," Mr. Crow explained. "I might be soaked before
I knew it--and you know that's very dangerous for one of my age."

It was not many days before there was another thunder-shower. And this
time Mr. Crow was ready for it. As soon as he felt the first drops he
spread his umbrella and raised it above his head. At last he was very,
very happy. For the first time in his life he was going to see what it
was like to stay out in the rain without getting wet.

Now, it hadn't rained long before Jasper Jay came hurrying up to Mr.
Crow, where he sat on Farmer Green's fence, and crawled under the
umbrella close beside the old gentleman.

"You don't mind, I hope?" said Jasper Jay.

"Well--n-no!" said Mr. Crow. "It's a big umbrella, fortunately. But I
hope no one else comes along."

The words were hardly out of his bill when Mr. Crow noticed a slim, gray
fellow, with a bushy tail, bounding toward them on top of the fence.

It was Frisky Squirrel. And he crept close to Mr. Crow, under the
umbrella, saying:

"You don't mind, I hope?"

"N-no!" replied Mr. Crow. With Frisky on one side of him and Jasper Jay
on the other Mr. Crow thought that maybe he could keep drier because they
were there. But he hoped no one else would pass that way.

Well, some one did. Before Mr. Crow knew what had happened, a voice
said--right over his shoulder:

"You don't mind, I hope?"

It was Fatty Coon! And Mr. Crow certainly did mind--though he didn't dare
say so. In the first place, Mr. Crow was afraid of Fatty Coon. And in the
second place, Fatty was so big that he crowded Mr. Crow almost off the
fence.

Old Mr. Crow found it very hard to hold the umbrella straight and cling
to the fence-rail at the same time. And something seemed to have made the
umbrella very heavy. In spite of all he could do, it would tilt. And Mr.
Crow crouched under the edge of it, right where the rain poured off. The
water dripped inside his collar and ran down his back until he was soaked
through and through.

Pretty soon Mr. Crow began to sneeze. At first he sneezed quite softly.
But every time it happened he sneezed harder than the time before. And at
last he sneezed so violently that he lost his hold on the fence and went
tumbling down to the ground, with the umbrella, Jasper Jay, Fatty Coon
and Frisky Squirrel on top of him.

As they fell, a huge, long-legged fellow named Christopher Crane alighted
on the fence, on the very spot where they had been sitting, and laughed
loudly at them.

"What's the joke?" Mr. Crow asked in an angry voice, as he picked himself
up. "I don't see anything to laugh at."

"Joke?" said Christopher Crane. "The joke's on me. I thought that thing
you have in your hand was a new kind of toadstool, growing on the fence.
And here I've been sitting on it all this time and never knew you chaps
were under it!"

At that, everybody except Mr. Crow began to laugh, too. But Mr. Crow
coughed; and his voice was hoarser than, ever as he said to Christopher
Crane:

"I'm wet as I can be. And I've caught a terrible cold. You're a
water-bird; and you don't mind a wetting. But for one of my age it's
very dangerous."

Then he started homeward. Though it was still raining, he tucked his
umbrella under his wing, for he was afraid those rude fellows would crowd
under it again.

And before he had reached his house Mr. Crow had made up his mind about
something.




XI

MR. CROW'S PLAN


Yes! Old Mr. Crow had made up his mind about something. After Jasper Jay
and Frisky Squirrel and Fatty Coon had come and crouched under his
umbrella, and Christopher Crane had perched himself on top of it, and Mr.
Crow had fallen off the fence, the old gentleman decided that he would
take no more chances. The next time it rained he knew exactly what he was
going to do.

He said nothing to anyone about his plan. It was a good one--Mr. Crow was
sure of that. And he could hardly wait for the next shower, he was so
eager to give his scheme a trial. He hoped that there would be a big
storm--not merely a quick shower, which would be over before he had had
time to enjoy it.

At last the storm came. And for once Mr. Crow was not disappointed. It
was the sort of storm that is worth waiting for. The wind had blown hard
all day. And the sky had grown almost as black as night. And old Mr. Crow
was watching in his house, with his umbrella grasped tight in his hands,
waiting for the rain.

When the rain began, it did not fall in a gentle patter. It came with a
rush and a roar, driven in white sheets before a mighty wind.

"This is great!" Mr. Crow cried aloud, as he stepped upon a limb outside
his house and spread his umbrella.

Now, this is what he had decided to do: He had determined that the very
next time it rained he would take his umbrella and fly up into the sky,
where he would not be annoyed by anybody coming along to share his
shelter with him.

For a moment Mr. Crow balanced himself on the limb. And the next moment,
he had jumped. Afterward, he could never remember exactly how it all
happened. Everything seemed like a bad dream to old Mr. Crow--such as he
sometimes had after eating too heartily of corn.

He felt himself swept up into the sky faster than he had flown for years.
He was pitched and tossed about; and in no time at all he was drenched
with water--for the cold rain pelted him as much as it pleased. He could
only cling to the handle of his umbrella. And so he sailed away, swaying
this way and that as the wind caught him, and always climbing higher and
higher into the sky.

He passed the top of Blue Mountain almost before he knew it. Looking
down, he could see Mrs. Eagle on her nest; and she seemed to be in a
flutter of excitement, too. She was frightened; and it was no wonder.
For she thought the umbrella was a monstrous bird, coming to snatch her
children away from her.

In a few minutes more Mr. Crow had crossed another mountain. He was
sailing away from home like a kite that has broken its string. And he was
rising so high in the air that he was beginning to grow uneasy. He began
to wonder what he had better do.

Of course, there was one thing he didn't have to worry about--and that
was _falling_. But he did want to go home.

You might suppose that he would have done that long before. But the
trouble was, he didn't want to lose his umbrella. He thought a great
deal of it; and he didn't know where he could get another. (You must
not forget that it was the only umbrella in Pleasant Valley.)

Old Mr. Crow had a hard time deciding just what to do. First, he thought
he would let go of the umbrella. Then he thought he wouldn't. Next, he
thought he would. And after that he thought he wouldn't, again.

Perhaps he would still be changing his mind like that if something hadn't
happened. Anyhow, all at once the umbrella turned inside out. And Mr.
Crow began to fall.

But he didn't fall far. For as soon as he realized what was going on he
let go of his umbrella-handle, spread his wings, and soared down to the
ground.

He made no attempt to find his way home until the next day, but spent the
night in an evergreen grove. And he didn't feel as badly about losing his
umbrella as you would have thought, for he said that ever since he had
owned it he had caught a wetting when it rained. And since that was the
case, he was better off without an umbrella, anyhow.




XII

A RACE WITH THE TRAIN


Old Mr. Crow was fond of gay clothes. Perhaps it was because he was so
black that he always chose bright colors. Anyhow, so long as he could
wear a bright red coat and a yellow necktie--or a bright red necktie and
a yellow coat--he was generally quite happy.

All his neighbors knew who he was as far as they could see him. No matter
if they caught only a flash of yellow or of red, they were pretty safe in
saying, "There goes old Mr. Crow!"

Well, it happened that during the summers that he spent in Pleasant
Valley Mr. Crow sometimes went on excursions.

"It's so dull here!" he would often say. "I like to see things _happen_,
once in a while." And that was the reason why he was often to be seen
flying far down to the other end of the valley, over the village. There
were many interesting sights there.

What Mr. Crow liked most of all was to watch the trains puffing along the
railroad, which ran close to the river in that part of Pleasant Valley.

Sometimes he flew directly over the trains and raced with them. He often
claimed that they were always trying to beat him. "But they can't do it,"
he boasted.

At last there came a day when something happened that made Mr. Crow feel
prouder than ever. He had gone down to the village, wearing his bright
red coat. And a little way beyond the furthest house he perched in a tree
by the side of the railroad and waited for the train to pass. He had
heard it snorting at the station and he knew it was about to start.

Pretty soon the train came thundering up the track. And as soon as
it reached him Mr. Crow started to race with it. He had no trouble in
beating it, as he always did. And then he did something he had never done
before. As soon as he had passed the engine he swooped down and flew
right across the track in front of it.

All at once the train set up a terrible noise. It seemed to Mr. Crow that
it ground its teeth. And it came to a sudden stop, hissing as if it were
very angry.

Old Mr. Crow was the least bit startled. He alighted in the top of a tall
elm. And while he watched, two men jumped down from the engine and walked
along the track for a while.

Then they crawled back into the engine; and the train went slowly on
again.

"That's queer!" said Mr. Crow to himself. "I never saw that happen
before. It looks to me as if the train was pretty angry because I beat
it. And if that's the case, I'm coming back here to-morrow at the same
hour and race the train again."

You can see just from that that Mr. Crow was something of a tease. All
his life he had teased his neighbors. And now he felt more important than
ever, because he thought he had found a way to tease a railroad train.




XIII

THE GAME OF CHECKERS


Mr. Crow told all his neighbors that he had made the train angry with
him. And he invited everyone to come down to the village with him the
following day, to enjoy the sport.

"I'm going to race the train again," Mr. Crow explained. "And I shall fly
right in front of it, too--just as I did to-day. You'll see what a fuss
it will make. And if you don't say it's a good joke, I'll never wear a
checkered red coat again."

The next day Jasper Jay invited Mr. Crow to take part in a game of
checkers. Whenever anybody in the neighborhood wanted to play checkers,
he had to ask Mr. Crow, on account of having to use his checkered red
coat for the board.

Mr. Crow accepted the invitation.

"But I shall have to stop at exactly sixteen minutes past two," he said.
"The train starts from the village at half past two sharp; and I don't
want to be late."

"Very well!" Jasper Jay agreed. "I shall want to stop then myself,
because I'm coming along with you to see the fun."

They had played twenty-seven games of checkers. And they were in the
midst of the twenty-eighth when Mr. Crow suddenly cocked his eye at the
sun.

"Goodness!" he exclaimed, springing up quickly. "It's fifteen and a half
minutes after two; and I shall have to be starting for the village." He
reached for his checkered red coat, which was spread upon the ground
between them.

"Wait a moment!" Jasper Jay cried. "I'd suggest your leaving your coat
right where it is. Then we can come back to our game after we've had our
fun with the train. I'm going to win the game, so it's hardly fair not to
finish it."

Now, Mr. Crow had not liked the idea of leaving his handsome red coat
upon the ground. But he never could bear the thought of being beaten. And
Jasper Jay's remark made him feel quite peevish.

"I fully expect to win this game myself," the old gentleman said somewhat
stiffly. "So I'll leave my coat here as you suggest. But I shall have to
go this instant, for I must stop at my house and get my yellow coat. Of
course I can't go down to the village in my shirtsleeves."

He hurried away then, with Jasper Jay close behind him. And as soon
as Mr. Crow had put on his bright yellow coat the two checker-players
started for the village.

When Jasper and Mr. Crow reached the tree where the old gentleman had
waited for the train the day before, they found as many as a dozen of
their neighbors already there. Even as Mr. Crow dropped down upon a limb,
he could hear the train coming up the track.

Mr. Crow's friends in the tree chose the best seats they could find, in
order to get a good view of the race. And at the foot of the tree Jimmy
Rabbit stood on tiptoe. He had often wished he could climb a tree--but
never so much as then.




XIV

THE LUCKY LAUGH


As the train drew nearer to the tree where Mr. Crow and his friends were
waiting, it gave a loud shriek.

"You hear that?" said Mr. Crow. "It's still angry." And he shouted an
impudent _caw-caw_ in reply.

In a moment more the race began. Mr. Crow had no trouble in beating
the train, just as he always had. And when he had passed it he dropped
quickly and swerved across the track ahead of it.

To his great surprise the train never faltered. It kept straight on,
going faster and faster. And the first thing Mr. Crow knew, the last car
had whipped around a curve and passed out of sight.

Poor Mr. Crow felt very downcast. He would have liked to hurry home at
once, because he hated to face his friends. But he knew they would follow
him if he flew away. So he went back to meet them, wearing a bold smile.

"Did you see what happened?" he inquired. "The train was _afraid to
stop_!"

Everybody laughed when Mr. Crow said that. People knew him too well to be
deceived by him.

"I suppose your yellow coat frightened it," Jasper Jay jeered. "It's too
bad you didn't wear your checkered red one."

At that remark Jimmy Rabbit pricked up his long ears.

"Did you wear your red coat yesterday?" he asked Mr. Crow.

"Yes!" Mr. Crow replied gruffly. He did not like being questioned by a
mere youngster like Jimmy Rabbit.

"And you say the train stopped when you flew in front of it yesterday?"

Mr. Crow grunted. But Jimmy Rabbit knew that he meant "Yes!"

"That's it!" Jimmy Rabbit cried. And he jumped up and down in his
excitement.

"That's what?" asked Mr. Crow in a sulky tone.

"I'll tell you!" said Jimmy. "Yesterday the train stopped because it saw
your red coat. That's the way to stop a train. You wave a red flag or a
red lantern at a train and it will always stop. But I've noticed that a
train pays no attention to any other color. Now, you could wave something
green, or yellow, or blue in front of a train; and no matter how hard
you waved, it would go right on as if it never saw you at all."

"Maybe you know," Mr. Crow snapped. "And maybe you don't. I said the
train was afraid to stop. And I still think so."

Jimmy Rabbit winked at the crowd in the tree.

"I must hop along now," he told them. "I'm glad I came to see the race,
for it has been even more fun than I expected."

Then Jasper Jay gave Mr. Crow a great start.

"It's too bad--" he said--"it's too bad you can't wear your red coat any
more, Mr. Crow."

"How's that?" asked Mr. Crow quickly.

"You promised that if we didn't say it was a good joke you'd never wear a
checkered red coat again."

Now, Mr. Crow had forgotten all about that remark. And for a moment he
looked worried. Then he turned cheerful all at once.

"Look here!" he cried. "When I came back to this tree you all laughed,
didn't you?"

Everybody admitted that.

"Then there must have been a good joke somewhere," Mr. Crow said. "And I
shall wear my red coat as often as I please."

No one really cared, anyhow, whether he did or whether he didn't. But Mr.
Crow was angry with Jasper Jay. And he refused to finish the game of
checkers with him.




XV

MR. CROW'S NEW COAT


When Mr. Crow decided, one fall, that he would stay in Pleasant Valley
during the winter, instead of going South, he remembered at once that he
would need a thick overcoat.

That was when he went to Mr. Frog's tailor's shop, for Mr. Frog, you
know, was a tailor.

"I want you to make me a warm overcoat." Mr. Crow told him. "Can you do
it?"

"Certainly!" said Mr. Frog. "You've come to the right place. Everybody
says that I'm the best tailor in Pleasant Valley." And that was quite
true--because he was the _only_ one. "What'll you have--stripes, checks,
or spots?" Mr. Frog asked briskly.

"What do you suggest?" Mr. Crow replied. He had not thought much about
his new coat--except that he wanted it to be warm.

"Spots, by all means!" said Mr. Frog. "I always wear 'em myself. They're
the best, to my mind. For if you happen to get a spot on your coat,
what's one spot more?"

"That's a good idea," Mr. Crow said. "And how much will you ask to make
me a spotted coat?"

"I charge by the spot," said Mr. Frog. "The more spots, the more the coat
will cost. So I'd advise you to take a coat with large spots, because
there'll be fewer of 'em and the price will be less."

"That's a good idea, too," said old Mr. Crow. "You may make my coat of
this!" He pointed to a piece of blue cloth with yellow spots about the
size of a dollar and a quarter.

"Good!" said Mr. Frog. Then he measured Mr. Crow. And then he measured
the cloth. And then he scratched some figures on a flat stone. "There'll
be thirteen spots on your coat and that'll make just thirteen that you'll
owe me."

"Thirteen what?" asked Mr. Crow.

"Ah! That's the question!" said Mr. Frog, mysteriously. "I'll tell you
when your coat's finished. And you can pay me then. It's what is known as
'spot cash,'" he added.

"Very well!" Mr. Crow answered. "And I'll come back--"

"To-morrow!" said the tailor.

When to-morrow came, Mr. Crow flew over to the pond where Mr. Frog had
his tailor's shop. And that spry gentleman slipped Mr. Crow's new coat
upon him. While Mr. Crow stood stiffly in the middle of the floor Mr.
Frog pulled the coat here and patted it there. He backed away and looked
at it, with his head on one side; and then he stood on his head and
looked at it, with his legs dangling in the air.

"It's a perfect fit," he assured Mr. Crow, finally. And then he caught up
a needle and thread and busied himself behind Mr. Crow's back for a long
time.

"What are you doing?" Mr. Crow inquired at last. "I'm getting tired of
standing still."

"Just fixing it!" answered Mr. Frog. "It'll be finished in a minute."

And it was. He stuck his needle into Mr. Crow, to let him know it was
done.

Mr. Crow jumped half way across the room. "Why did you do that?" he asked
hotly.

"I wanted to break my thread," Mr. Frog explained pleasantly. "It's the
quickest way of breaking a thread that I know of."

"You look out, or I'll break something else for you," Mr. Crow squawked,
for he was thoroughly enraged. "And now," he added, "I'll pay you what I
owe before leaving. I owe thirteen of something."

Then Mr. Frog surprised him.

"I've decided not to take any pay," he announced. "I hear that thirteen
is an unlucky number."

"Is that so?" Mr. Frog exclaimed. "Perhaps it is. If you had stuck your
needle into me thirteen times it certainly would have been unlucky for
you."

On the whole Mr. Crow was well pleased with his bargain. He was glad
that he had asked Mr. Frog to make a coat for him. Indeed, if only the
tailor had not stabbed him with his needle, he would have returned to the
shop at once and ordered Mr. Frog to make him a pair of trousers--with
thirteen spots on them.




XVI

A TIGHT FIT


Now, a certain thing happened that made Mr. Crow change his mind about
staying North for the winter. It had something to do with nuts, and
Frisky Squirrel, and Sandy Chipmunk. But that is another story; and
you may already have heard it.

Anyhow, Mr. Crow suddenly decided that he would have to fly southward,
after all. He was disappointed, because he didn't like the thought of
having to make so long a journey. Moreover, he had his new blue coat with
the yellow spots, which Mr. Frog had made for him. It was a handsome
coat. And everybody said it was very becoming to Mr. Crow. But he knew it
was altogether too warm to wear to his home in the South where the
weather was sure to be mild.

"I'll have to leave my new coat behind," he said to himself in a sad
voice. "It's almost too heavy to wear even here, though it is fall. I
hate to do it; but I'd better take it off and hide it somewhere. There
might be some cold days next spring when I'd be glad of a thick, warm
coat."

So the old gentleman started to unbutton his new coat, which he had worn
all day, ever since Mr. Frog had slipped it on him early in the morning.
Anyone might think that it would have been an easy matter to unbutton the
coat, for Mr. Frog had sewed a double row of big brown buttons down the
front of it. But for some time Mr. Crow fumbled with one of them in vain.

"Ha!" he exclaimed at last. "This is stupid of me! I'm trying to unbutton
the wrong row of buttons." Then he fumbled with one of the buttons of the
other row. But strange to say, he was no more successful than before. He
struggled with all the buttons in that row (there were five of them). And
then he tried the other five, one after another.

Mr. Crow couldn't understand it. He wanted more than ever to take the
coat off, because his efforts to unbutton it had made him quite warm.

"I shall have get somebody to help me," he said at last. "It may be that
my eyesight is failing--though I haven't noticed before that there was
anything the matter with it.... There's my cousin, Jasper Jay! I'll ask
him to unbutton my coat." And he called to Jasper, who had just alighted
on a stump not far away.

To Mr. Crow's dismay, his cousin refused to assist him.

"I know you too well," said Jasper Jay. "You want to play some trick on
me. If the buttons were on the back of your coat I might help you. But
they're right in front of you; and they're so big that a blind person
couldn't help finding them, even on the darkest night.... No! You can't
fool me this time!"

"Very well!" Mr. Crow croaked. "If you won't help me, there are plenty of
other people who'll be glad to." And he flew away in something very like
a temper.

To Mr. Crow's surprise he couldn't find anyone that would unbutton his
new coat for him; like Jasper Jay, everybody was afraid that Mr. Crow
meant to play a trick on him.

Mr. Crow was beginning to be frightened. He had called on all his friends
in Pleasant Valley except one. And if that one should refuse, Mr. Crow
didn't know what he could do. He had liked his spotted coat. But now he
began to hate it. And he wanted to slip out of it and never see it again.

So Mr. Crow hurried over to the swamp where Fatty Coon lived.




XVII

THE STRANGE BUTTONS


To Mr. Crow's delight, it did not occur to Fatty Coon that Mr. Crow might
be playing a trick on him. You see, as was usually the case, Fatty was
hungry. And he had no thought for anything except food. When Mr. Crow
explained what a fix he was in, and asked Fatty to unbutton his coat for
him, Fatty stepped up to him at once.

But he didn't try to unbutton the coat. He sniffed at the buttons, while
his face wore a puzzled look. And then he began to smile.

"I'll tell you what I'll do!" Fatty said. "If you'll give me these
buttons, I'll take them off for you. And then, of course, you'll have no
more trouble with your coat. You can throw it off any time you please."

"Good!" Mr. Crow exclaimed. "The buttons shall be yours. I don't want
them, for I shall never wear this coat again."

So Fatty Coon set to work to take off the buttons. He removed them in a
very odd way, too. Instead of tearing them off he began eating them!

"Goodness!" Mr. Crow cried. "Aren't you afraid you'll be ill?"

But Fatty Coon never answered. He kept on nibbling the buttons and
crunching them in his mouth. And he never stopped until he had swallowed
the very last one.

Then he smacked his lips (for he knew no better).

"Those were the finest gingersnaps I ever tasted," he remarked. "It's a
pity there weren't a baker's dozen of them, instead of only ten."

Old Mr. Crow nearly fell over, he was so surprised. He had never dreamed
that those big brown buttons, which Mr. Frog had sewed upon his coat,
were nothing but gingersnaps.

"If I'd known that I would have eaten them myself!" he exclaimed. "But I
don't care. Now that I can get out of this heavy coat, I'm satisfied."

But to Mr. Crow's dismay, the coat clung round him as tightly as ever. He
couldn't throw it open at all. And he turned the least bit pale.

"This is strange!" he murmured. "What can be the matter, I wonder!"

Fatty Coon looked at the coat again. And then he laughed.

"The trouble--" he said--"the trouble is, there are no buttonholes! Your
coat doesn't open in front. And it doesn't open anywhere else, either.
It's _sewed on you_, Mr. Crow."

Poor Mr. Crow began to feel faint. He leaned against a tree and did not
speak for some time. But he was thinking deeply. And all at once he
understood what had happened.

"It's all the fault of that silly tailor, Mr. Frog!" he groaned. "He made
me stand still a long time. And that was when he sewed my coat up the
back.... What can I do?" he asked helplessly.

"If I were you I'd go straight to Mr. Frog's shop and make him take
the stitches out," Fatty Coon said. "And if he has any more of those
gingersnaps, I wish you'd let me know."




XVIII

AN UNLUCKY NUMBER


As soon as old Mr. Crow pushed open the door of Mr. Frog's tailor's shop,
Mr. Frog jumped up quickly. He had been sitting cross-legged upon a
table, sewing. And when he leaped off the table he sprang so high that
his head struck the ceiling.

"What's that noise?" Mr. Crow asked him nervously, when Mr. Frog had
landed upon his feet. "It sounded like thunder; but there's not a cloud
in the sky."

"It was my head," Mr. Frog explained. "It hit the ceiling, you know."

"Oh!" said Mr. Crow. "It made a very hollow sound. But I am not
surprised. I have already learned that your head is quite empty."

"It's certainly not solid," Mr. Frog agreed pleasantly. No matter what
happened, he never lost his temper.

But Mr. Crow was different. _He_ was angry.

"You've got me into a pretty fix!" said he. "And now you must get me out
of it."

"I suppose you want more buttons," Mr. Prog observed. "I noticed as you
came in that you had lost every one."

"No!" Mr. Crow told him. "What I want is to get out of this coat. I've
decided to spend the winter in the South, after all. And here you've been
and gone and sewed the coat on me, and left me no way at all to slip out
of it."

"I beg your pardon," the tailor replied politely. "Pardon _me_--but I
think you are mistaken. I left four openings through which anyone could
crawl out."

Old Mr. Crow looked puzzled.

"I should like to know where they are," he said.

"The neck, the skirts, and the two sleeves!" Mr. Frog told him.

At that Mr. Crow looked at him severely.

"How could you expect me to slip through any of those places?" he asked.

"Why--" said the tailor--"I thought it would be easy for you. I've always
heard you were a very slippery customer."

When he said that, Mr. Crow made some queer noises in his throat, much as
if he were choking.

"Are you ill?" the tailor cried.

"Just a frog in my throat!" Mr. Crow answered.

As he said that. Mr. Frog leaped toward the door. He was a jumpy sort of
person. When anything startled him you could never tell in what direction
he might spring. And he was now about to rush out of his shop when Mr.
Crow caught him and dragged him back.

"You can't go," he shouted, "until you've taken the stitches out of the
back of my coat."

"Oh, certainly!" Mr. Frog quavered. And he set to work at once to open
the back seam of Mr. Crow's coat.

He was a spry worker--was Mr. Frog. In less time than it takes to tell it
he had ripped the back of the coat from collar to hem.

And old Mr. Crow was no less spry in pulling the coat off and flinging it
into a corner.

"There!" Mr. Crow cried. "There's your coat with the thirteen spots on
it! I certainly don't want it, for it has caused me no end of trouble."
Then he turned and hurried out of the shop, without stopping even to
thank Mr. Frog for what he had done.

Before Mr. Crow was out of hearing, the tailor thrust his head through
the doorway and called to the departing Mr. Crow.

"I told you--" said Mr. Frog--"I told you thirteen was an unlucky
number."




XIX

THE SHOE-STORE


"Dear me!" old Mr. Crow exclaimed one day. "I see I shall have to get
some new shoes. I've had these only about ten years and they're worn
through already. The trouble is, I don't know where to buy any more." He
was talking to his cousin, Jasper Jay.

"I can tell you," said Jasper. "That Rabbit boy--the one they call
Jimmy--has a shoe-store. You know he's always trying something new. He
has had a barber's shop; and he's been a tooth-puller. And now he has
opened a shoe-store over in the meadow."

"I'm glad to know it," Mr. Crow replied, "though I must say I wish it was
somebody else. There's something about that Rabbit boy that I don't like.
Maybe it's the way he wags his ears and wriggles his nose. And he's
always jumping."

"He's a bright young fellow," said Jasper Jay.

Old Mr. Crow coughed.

"A little too bright, sometimes," he ventured. "But he'll have to be a
good deal brighter to play any of his tricks on me."

"You think you're enough for him?" Jasper inquired.

"Think?" cried Mr. Crow. "I _know_ I am. And though I hate to get any
shoes in his shop, I'm afraid I shall have to just this once."

Later that day Mr. Crow went to the shoe-shop in the meadow. And Jimmy
Rabbit was delighted to see him.

"Come right in!" he invited Mr. Crow. "I see you need some new shoes. And
you've made no mistake in coming here for them."

"I hope not," Mr. Crow responded gruffly. He went inside the store and
sat down. And Jimmy Rabbit knelt before him and measured one of his feet.

Now, Mr. Crow had enormous feet. Big feet had always run--or walked--in
his family. And though he couldn't any more help the size of his feet
than the size of his bill, old Mr. Crow was very touchy in respect to
them. He grew angry at once.

"What do you mean by measuring my feet?" he croaked. "I didn't come here
to be insulted, you know."

Jimmy Rabbit looked up at him mildly.

"I just wanted to find out how _small_ your feet are," he explained
politely enough. "Sometimes people come here with feet so small that I
can't fit them. And when I looked at yours I was afraid that might be
the case."

"Oh!" said Mr. Crow. The answer pleased him. "Show me the best pair of
shoes you have," he ordered.

So Jimmy Rabbit began to search his shelves. To tell the truth, he was
puzzled. He had no shoes big enough for Mr. Crow. But he did not dare
tell the old gentleman that, because he knew Mr. Crow would be very
angry.

At last Jimmy Rabbit found the biggest shoes in the place. And he showed
them to Mr. Crow, who seemed much pleased.

"I'll try them on," Mr. Crow said.

Jimmy Rabbit held out the shoes, hoping that Mr. Crow would take them.
But Mr. Crow had no such notion in his head.

"I mean, _you_ may try them on _me_" he added.

"You didn't say that," Jimmy Rabbit reminded him.

"No further remarks are necessary," Mr. Crow screamed in a shrill voice.

And at that Jimmy Rabbit knelt before him once more and began to crowd
one of Mr. Crow's feet into one of the shoes.

Jimmy struggled for a long time without saying a word. But Mr. Crow said
several words under his breath, for Jimmy was hurting him dreadfully.

There were two reasons for that. In the first place, the shoe was much
too small for Mr. Crow. And in the second, Jimmy Rabbit was putting the
left shoe on Mr. Crow's right foot.

But neither of them knew that second reason.




XX

OLD SHOES FOR NEW


Old Mr. Crow was too proud to admit that the shoe Jimmy Rabbit was
pulling upon his right foot was too small for him. But he would have
objected, to be sure, had he known that it was the left shoe. He would
have objected likewise when Jimmy crammed his left foot into the right
shoe a few minutes later. But Mr. Crow only knew that his feet already
ached.

"Now just stand on them!" Jimmy Rabbit said at last.

And Mr. Crow stood up.

"Now walk a bit," the shoe merchant continued.

But Mr. Crow could not walk. He _hobbled_ a short distance. And then he
sank down with a groan.

"They don't hurt you, do they?" Jimmy Rabbit asked him.

And Mr. Crow shook his head. He thought he could do that truthfully. What
he felt was far worse than a mere _hurt_. It was _torture_--that was
certainly what it was.

Of course Jimmy Rabbit knew what the trouble was--or part of it, at
least. He knew that Mr. Crow's toes were doubled up inside the shoes. And
it was on the tip of his tongue to suggest to Mr. Crow that he have his
toes cut off. But a better way soon occurred to Jimmy Rabbit.

"I know you'll find these shoes very comfortable--after they're
finished," he told Mr. Crow.

"Finished!" Mr. Crow exclaimed. "Do you mean to say they're only partly
made?"

"There's just one more thing to do to them," Jimmy Rabbit explained. "The
holes haven't been cut in them yet."

"Holes!" said Mr. Crow. "What holes?"

"Why, the holes for your toes, of course!" Jimmy Rabbit answered.
"Maybe you didn't know that shoes are to be worn like that this summer.
It makes them much cooler in hot weather."

Well, Mr. Crow liked the idea. He said so, too. He certainly couldn't
wear the shoes as they were. And if everybody else was going to wear
shoes with toe-holes, he didn't want to be behind the times. But he
hadn't seen anybody with shoes made after that fashion. And he told Jimmy
Rabbit as much.

"Ah!" said Jimmy Rabbit. "Quite true! You'll be the first in Pleasant
Valley, Mr. Crow. You'll set the fashion, instead of following it. Better
be first than last, you know!"

Old Mr. Crow agreed to that. So he let Jimmy Rabbit cut as many holes in
the shoes as he had toes--that made four holes in each shoe.

And then Mr. Crow thrust his toes through the holes. To his great delight
he could walk with ease and comfort. And he was about to leave the store
when Jimmy Rabbit stopped him.

"Haven't you forgotten something?" he asked.

"I don't think so," Mr. Crow replied.

"Yes, you have!" Jimmy Rabbit insisted. "You've forgotten your bill!"

Mr. Crow looked at him in amazement. And then he felt of his face.

"None of your tricks, young man!" he cried. "My bill is right where it
belongs. How _could_ I forget it, I should like to know?"

"You don't understand," said Jimmy Rabbit. "What I mean is this: You
haven't paid me for the shoes."

"Oh!" said Mr. Crow. And he looked away quickly. "Well, you may keep my
old shoes. I'm sure that's a fair exchange."

And he pretended to be surprised when Jimmy Rabbit did not agree with
him.

"Your old shoes are full of holes," Jimmy objected. "I don't want them."

And there Mr. Crow had him.

"These shoes I have on are full of holes, too," he declared. "And if one
hole isn't just as good as another, then I may as well go back to school
again." And with that he stalked angrily away.

As it happened, old Mr. Crow had never been to school in his life. But
he thought the remark sounded well. And it seemed to keep Jimmy Rabbit
quiet. He couldn't think of a thing to say until long after Mr. Crow had
gone.

And then it was too late.




XXI

THE CROW CAUCUS


"Where are all those crows going?" Johnnie Green asked his father one
evening. He pointed to a long line of big black birds that straggled
across the sky. They came from across the valley. And they were
travelling fast toward the pine woods near the foot of Blue Mountain.
"They seem to be in a hurry," said Johnnie Green.

His father took one look at the procession and laughed.

"They're going to a crow caucus, I guess," he answered.

And then Johnnie wanted to know what a caucus was. He asked so many other
questions, too, that Farmer Green didn't succeed in answering them all
until they had almost finished their supper.

Now, it was the custom of old Mr. Crow and many of his dusky friends to
gather at sunset in the pine woods and hold a _meeting_. That was what
Farmer Green meant when he said they were going to a _caucus_. And if he
could have been there himself he would have been astonished at the things
he would have heard.

But for some reason he was never invited to attend one of those twilight
meetings. Perhaps it was because disagreeable remarks were sometimes made
about Farmer Green!

On that evening when Johnnie noticed the flight of Mr. Crow's cronies
toward the woods something happened at the meeting that displeased that
old gentleman. Being the biggest--as well as the oldest--crow in the
neighborhood, for years past he had called every such meeting to order.
And he had always done most of the talking, too.

But old Mr. Crow was late that night. When he reached the pine woods he
found that a stranger had taken his accustomed seat in a great tree and
was already addressing the gathering in a loud and commanding voice.

And nobody paid any attention to old Mr. Crow. Nobody made room for him.
He had to take a back seat on a limb that was crowded with boisterous
young fellows, who kept pushing and poking one another. It was most
annoying.

"Who's that person that's so fond of hearing himself talk?" Mr. Crow
asked someone in the next tree. He spoke in such a loud voice that
everybody could hear him. And the stranger cried out sharply:

"Silence!"

Thereupon everyone looked around at Mr. Crow and frowned.

He felt both angry and uncomfortable. And for a little while he sat as
still as he could and listened to the stranger's remarks.

Now, the newcomer was talking about the hard times. He said that there
weren't as many grasshoppers as usual that year, and that Farmer Green
had put tar on his corn before he planted it and that the rats had stolen
most of his young chickens (of course that left very few for _them_), and
that the wild berry crop was poor.

Everybody agreed with the stranger. And everybody nodded his head, as if
to say, "That's quite true!"--at least, everybody but Mr. Crow. He was
determined that he would not agree with anything the stranger said. And
so he shouted, "Nonsense!" at the top of his lungs.

A murmur ran through the meeting. And there were cries of "Put him out!"

"That's what I say, too!" Mr. Crow bellowed.

And then he could hardly believe his ears when someone near him said,
"They mean you!"




XXII

THE TEST


Well, it was no wonder that Mr. Crow was surprised when he found that
some people wanted to put him out of the meeting just because he had said
one word. Had he not always talked more than anybody else at those sunset
meetings in the pine woods?

Luckily, no one made a move to oust him. And he managed to keep silent
for a little while. But he was so angry that he did not hear what the
stranger was saying. At last, however, Mr. Crow began to pay attention
again.

"Do you want to know why times are hard and food is scarce in this
neighborhood?" the impudent fellow asked.

Everybody except old Mr. Crow answered, "Yes!" And after the echo had
died away the stranger continued:

"It's because you need a new leader," he declared. "I understand that a
person called 'Old Mr. Crow' has been your leader for a good many years.
And my advice to you, friends, is this: _Get rid of him_!"

A good deal of applause greeted his words. But some of the older and
wiser of his listeners shook their heads.

"Who is there that could take Mr. Crow's place?" a voice called.

At that question the stranger coughed slightly and said:

"Of course, I wouldn't suggest any one specially, being a newcomer here
myself. And if the position were offered to me, I don't know that I could
accept it, though I _have_ had so much experience."

The young fellows on the limb with Mr. Crow at once set up a great
cawing.

"We want you!" they chanted. Old Mr. Crow might have been a scarecrow,
for all the attention they paid to him. And he did not dare open his
mouth. Many others took up the cry. And a great hub-bub arose--a beating
of wings, and flying up and down, and jostling. Some of the younger ones
squawked like chickens; others pretended to cry like children. But most
of the company cawed in their loudest tones, until the whole valley rang
with the uproar.

Then one of old Mr. Crow's best friends spoke up and said:

"It's plain that a good many people want _you_ for a leader, stranger."

"Then I'd be very happy to act as such," the bold fellow replied. "And
I'll begin at once."

But the elderly person who had just spoken said that there was no hurry
and that the stranger ought first to be put to a test.

"We want to make sure that you're a good leader," he explained. "And I
would suggest that you go to see Farmer Green to-morrow, tell him that we
object to his putting tar on his corn, and ask him not to do it again
next spring."

The stranger looked somewhat uneasy, as he listened. But after he had
pondered for a few moments he said briskly:

"I'll do that! I'll go to Farmer Green to-morrow (he won't be busy, for
to-morrow's Sunday), and I'll make him agree to what you want."

"We'll meet again on Monday, at sunset," Mr. Crow's friend announced.

And then the meeting broke up in the wildest disorder.

As for old Mr. Crow, he crept away without speaking to anyone. And
always, before, he had made more noise than any ten of the others.




XXIII

THE WHITE FLAG


Unhappy Mr. Crow could scarcely eat a mouthful of food after that meeting
on Saturday night, when he found the stranger talking to the gathering.
He was worried, because he knew that if the stranger succeeded in getting
Farmer Green to promise that he would not put tar on his corn the
following spring, everybody would choose the newcomer to be the leader of
all the crows in Pleasant Valley. And that was an honor that old Mr. Crow
had had for years.

For two whole days he sulked at home. He wouldn't even go to his door
when anybody knocked. But on Monday evening Mr. Crow was the first to
reach the meeting-place in the pine woods, long before sunset. He sat
himself down in the leader's seat. And there he intended to stay as
long as he could.

At last his neighbors came straggling to the woods. And when the stranger
arrived he seemed annoyed because he could not have Mr. Crow's seat. And
he said in an undertone to Mr. Crow:

"I advise you to go home."

The old gentleman glared at him. And he answered in a loud voice:

"I advise you to go home yourself--_if you have a home to go to_!"

Now, some people thought that Mr. Crow's answer was a good one. So they
laughed. And that made the stranger feel quite uncomfortable.

But there were others who spoke up and said that Mr. Crow's remark was
very unkind. They knew that the stranger had a beautiful home, further
north, because he had told them all about it.

And that made him feel better once more.

Then old Mr. Crow called the meeting to order. And immediately the
stranger announced in a loud voice:

"I saw Farmer Green and he has surrendered!"

Then there was even more noise than is usual at a crow caucus. It was a
long time before old Mr. Crow could quiet the meeting. But he succeeded
at last. And when it was still he said to the stranger:

"How do you know Farmer Green has surrendered?"

It was so quiet that you could have heard a pine-needle fall, for
everyone was straining his ears to hear.

"Farmer Green hung out the white flag to-day!" the stranger told them.

Well, then there was another outburst. Of course, everybody knew that the
white flag was the sign of surrender. And it was some time before old Mr.
Crow could restore order.

"I doubt it!" he cried, to everyone's astonishment.

"It's true!" a voice shouted. "I know, for I saw--_caw_--_caw_! There was
not only _one_ white flag; there were _dozens_ of them!"

And then Mr. Crow surprised them by laughing loudly. He stopped at last
and wiped his eyes--for he had actually wept, both with joy and
amusement.

"What day is this?" he inquired.

And a hundred voices answered: "Monday!"

"Right!" said Mr. Crow. "And Monday is washday at the farmhouse. Those
white flags at Farmer Green's--they were the family wash, hung out on the
line to dry!"

Then all Mr. Crow's neighbors crowded around him and told him that they
wanted him for their leader--and that they always had. They said that
they knew all the time that the stranger was a fraud.

"Where is he?" someone inquired. "Let's fix him!"

But when they turned to look for the stranger they couldn't find him
anywhere. He had vanished. Though Mr. Crow and his friends searched far
and wide for the bold, bad fellow, their efforts were all in vain. During
the bustle that had followed Mr. Crow's short speech the newcomer had
quietly made his escape. And no doubt it was just as well for him that he
left the meeting when he did.

Some said he had hurried off towards the north; while others claimed that
he had gone in a southerly direction. And though they have kept an eye
out for him ever since, they have not found--or "fixed him"--yet.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALE OF OLD MR. CROW***


******* This file should be named 14402.txt or 14402.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/4/4/0/14402



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
