The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Tale of Rusty Wren, by Arthur Scott
Bailey, Illustrated by Harry L. Smith


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Tale of Rusty Wren


Author: Arthur Scott Bailey



Release Date: June 17, 2008  [eBook #25824]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALE OF RUSTY WREN***


E-text prepared by Joe Longo, Suzan Flanagan, and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 25824-h.htm or 25824-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/5/8/2/25824/25824-h/25824-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/5/8/2/25824/25824-h.zip)





THE TALE OF RUSTY WREN

ARTHUR SCOTT BAILEY

[Illustration]

Tuck-Me-In Tales
(Trademark Registered)


[Illustration: "It's All Right," Said Solomon]

[Illustration: The Ant Soldiers Rushed at Daddy]

[Illustration: Mrs. Ladybug Directs Mr. Potato Bug.]

[Illustration: "What's The Joke?" Asked Rusty Wren]

[Illustration: Jasper Shrieked at the Top of His Voice]

[Illustration: "This Boy's Stuck Fast In Our Door!"]

[Illustration: Betsy Listened With Amazement to Mrs. Ladybug.]

[Illustration: Jolly Robin And Jimmy Rabbit Inspect The Snow-Man]




THE TALE OF RUSTY WREN




Tuck-Me-In Tales
(Trademark Registered)

BY
ARTHUR SCOTT BAILEY

Author Of
Sleepy-Time Tales
(Trademark Registered)

     THE TALE OF JOLLY ROBIN
     THE TALE OF OLD MR. CROW
     THE TALE OF SOLOMON OWL
     THE TALE OF JASPER JAY
     THE TALE OF RUSTY WREN
     THE TALE OF DADDY LONGLEGS
     THE TALE OF KIDDIE KATYDID
     THE TALE OF BUSTER BUMBLEBEE
     THE TALE OF FREDDIE FIREFLY
     THE TALE OF BETSY BUTTERFLY
     THE TALE OF BOBBY BOBOLINK
     THE TALE OF CHIRPY CRICKET
     THE TALE OF MRS. LADYBUG
     THE TALE OF REDDY WOODPECKER
     THE TALE OF GRANDMOTHER GOOSE




[Illustration: "That Won't Do," Said Rusty Wren
                    _Frontispiece_--(_Page 2_)]




Tuck-Me-In Tales
(Registered Trademark)

THE TALE OF RUSTY WREN

by

ARTHUR SCOTT BAILEY

Author of
"Sleepy-Time Tales"
(Registered Trademark)

Illustrated by Harry L. Smith







New York
Grosset & Dunlap
Publishers

Made in the United States of America

Copyright, 1917, by
Grosset & Dunlap




CONTENTS


     CHAPTER                      PAGE

     I. A PLEASANT HOME              1

     II. JOHNNIE GREEN'S IDEA        6

     III. THE ALARM CLOCK           11

     IV. RUSTY IS JEALOUS           16

     V. THE NEW BIRD                21

     VI. MR. CROW TO THE RESCUE     27

     VII. A NEAT HOUSEKEEPER        33

     VIII. RUSTY IN TROUBLE         38

     IX. ALL'S WELL AGAIN           42

     X. BAD NEWS                    47

     XI. THE NOISE ON THE ROOF      52

     XII. THE UNWELCOME VISITOR     57

     XIII. BOY WANTED!              62

     XIV. TOO MANY CALLERS          67

     XV. MR. CHIPPY'S SON           72

     XVI. THE ACCIDENT              77

     XVII. HELP! HELP!              82

     XVIII. THE PUZZLE              87

     XIX. A FRIEND, INDEED          92

     XX. AN INVITATION              99

     XXI. OFF TO BLACK CREEK       104

     XXII. THE FORGOTTEN GUEST     109

     XXIII. A STRANGE MISTAKE      114




THE TALE OF RUSTY WREN

I

A PLEASANT HOME


Now, Rusty Wren had found--and shown to his wife--a hollow apple
tree and a hole in a fence-rail, either of which he thought would
make a pleasant place in which to live.

But since the little couple were _house wrens_, Rusty's wife said
she thought that they oughtn't to be so far from the farmhouse.

"Why not build our nest behind one of the shutters?" she
suggested.

But Rusty shook his head quickly--and with decision.

"That won't do," said he. "Somebody might come to the window and
close the shutter; and then our nest would fall to the ground. And
if we happened to have six or eight eggs in it, you know you
wouldn't like that very well."

Rusty's wife agreed with him on that point. But she still insisted
that she wanted to live near the farmhouse; and she said that she
expected her husband to find a good spot for their nest, for she
certainly wasn't going to spend the summer in a hole in a
fence-rail, or in an old apple tree, either.

Rusty Wren saw at once that there was no sense in arguing with her.
If he wanted any peace, he knew that he might as well forget the
old hollow apple tree and the hole in the fence-rail too. He had
better forget them and resume his search for a home. So he gave
his plump little cinnamon-colored body a shake and held his tail at
even a higher angle than usual, just to show people that he was
going to be the head of the house--when they should have one. Then
with a flirt of his short, round wings he hurried over to Farmer
Green's dooryard--after calling to his wife that he would come back
and tell her if he had any luck.

Rusty Wren spent some busy moments about Farmer Green's buildings.
And since he loved to be busy and was never so happy as when he had
something important to do, he hopped and climbed and fluttered to
his heart's content, looking into a hundred different holes and
cracks and crannies.

But he didn't find a single one that suited him. Every place into
which he peered was either too big or too little, or too high or
too low; or it was where the rain would beat upon it; or maybe it
was so situated that the cat could thrust her paw inside. Anyhow,
every possible nook for a nest had some drawback. And Rusty was
wondering what he could say to his wife, who was sure to be upset
if her plans went wrong, when all at once he came upon the finest
place for a house that he had ever seen. One quick look through the
small round opening that led to it was enough.

He knew right away that his search was ended. So he hurried back to
the orchard to find Mrs. Rusty and tell her the good news.

"I've found the best spot for a house in all Pleasant Valley!" he
cried, as he dropped down beside her and hopped about in his
excitement.

"Is it in a good neighborhood?" she inquired calmly.

"Yes, indeed!" he replied. "It's in a tree close to Farmer Green's
bedroom window."

"A hole in a tree!" she exclaimed somewhat doubtfully. "Not an old
squirrel's nest, I hope?"

"No, no!" he assured her. "It's not really _in_ a tree. It's nailed
to a tree. Come with me and I'll show you."

At that the bustling little pair hastened toward the farmhouse.
And, to Rusty's delight, the moment his wife saw what he had found
she said at once that it was exactly the sort of house she had
always hoped to have, some time.




II

JOHNNIE GREEN'S IDEA


It happened that just before Rusty Wren and his wife came to
Pleasant Valley to look for a home, Johnnie Green had an idea.

He found the idea in the weekly paper which the letter-carrier left
each Friday in the mail box at the crossroads. On the Children's
Page Johnnie read a story about a pair of house wrens. And he
learned then that an old tin can nailed to a tree makes exactly the
sort of house that wrens like.

Well, Johnnie Green began at once to look for a tin can. He had
made up his mind that he would try to coax a couple of those busy
little songsters to nest near-by, where he could have fun watching
them.

Not finding an _old_ tin can that suited him, Johnnie took a shiny
maple syrup can, which his father said he might have. It seemed to
him that it was just the kind he needed, for the only opening in it
was a small round hole in the top, hardly bigger than a
twenty-five-cent piece. (The story in the weekly paper said that
the wrens' doorway should be as small as that, so that no ruffianly
English sparrows could enter the house and disturb the little
people that were to dwell there.)

Johnnie Green punched a few nail holes in the sides of the syrup
can, because he thought that if _he_ lived in such a place, he
would want plenty of fresh air. Then he nailed a board to the can.
And next he nailed the board to a cherry tree close to the house.

After that Johnnie had nothing more to do but wait. And he had not
waited two days before Rusty Wren discovered the bright tin can
that was to be his summer home.

As soon as she saw it, Rusty's wife said that there must be kind
people living in the farmhouse, or they never would have driven
nails through a spick-and-span can just to make strangers happy.

Since their search was ended, the tiny pair began building their
nest right then and there. In a surprisingly short time they had
completely filled their new house with twigs. And as soon as they
had done that much, in the center of the mass of twigs they built a
nest of dried grasses, singing the merriest of songs while they
worked.

Of course, Johnnie Green was delighted. All the time the lively
little couple were at work upon their new home it was easy to find
Johnnie. But it was hard to get him to do any errands, because he
didn't want to stir from the dooryard, he was so interested in what
was going on.

Farmer Green, too, seemed pleased. And though he didn't spend much
time watching Mr. and Mrs. Rusty (he said that he had to work, the
same as they), he remarked to Johnnie that he was glad to see that
the newcomers were already paying rent for their house.

Johnnie Green looked puzzled.

"Rent?" he exclaimed. "I don't understand."

"Just hear them!" his father replied. "Isn't their singing pay
enough for the use of a tin syrup can?"

"That's so!" cried Johnnie. "I never thought of that. Why, they've
turned that can into a regular music-box!"




III

THE ALARM CLOCK


All summer long Farmer Green rose while the world was still gray,
before the sun climbed over the mountain to flood Pleasant Valley
with his golden light.

One might think that Farmer Green would have had some trouble
awaking so early in the morning. And perhaps he might have
overslept now and then had he not had a never-failing alarm clock
to arouse him.

It was not one of those man-made clocks, which go off with a
deafening clatter and bring a startled body to his feet before he
is really awake. No! Farmer Green had something much pleasanter
than that; and it was not in his bedroom, either.

His alarm clock was in his dooryard, for it was Rusty Wren himself
who always warned him that day was breaking and that it was time to
get up and go to work.

Every morning, without fail, Rusty sang his dawn song right under
Farmer Green's window. His musical trill, sounding very much like
the brook that rippled its way down the side of Blue Mountain,
always made Farmer Green feel glad that another day had come.

"If that busy little chap is up----" he often said, meaning Rusty
Wren, of course--"if he's up there's no reason why I should lie
here and sleep."

And since everybody else in the house followed Farmer Green's
custom of rising early, it happened that so small a bird as Rusty
Wren aroused the whole household out of their beds.

To be sure, Johnnie Green--sitting up and rubbing his eyes
sleepily--sometimes wished that Rusty would skip his dawn song once
in a while. And he told his father at breakfast one day that since
he was not a bird, he saw no reason why he should get up with the
sun.

"You needn't," said Farmer Green. "But you know the old saying
about 'early to bed and early to rise,' don't you?"

Johnnie remembered that such habits were supposed to make one
"healthy, wealthy and wise." And since he hated to take medicine,
and was trying to save enough money to buy him a gun, and disliked
to be kept in after school for not knowing his lessons, he decided
that perhaps it was just as well, after all, to follow Rusty
Wren's example.

Now, Farmer Green spoke so often and so pleasantly of Rusty Wren,
saying that nobody could want a better little alarm clock than he,
that Rusty began to take a great deal of pride in his morning task
of awakening the household. It could hardly be called a task,
however, because Rusty thoroughly enjoyed singing, though when he
sang--as when he did anything else--he put every ounce of his
strength into the effort. With his head lifted as high as his short
neck would permit, and his tail (which usually stuck pertly
upwards) drooping downward, as if he had for the moment forgotten
it, he poured forth his music with such fervor that his small body
actually trembled.

You see, Rusty Wren never did things by halves. When he did
anything he was never satisfied with less than his best.

And that was another reason why Farmer Green liked him.




IV

RUSTY IS JEALOUS


Before Rusty Wren came to live in Farmer Green's dooryard the
family had been known to oversleep now and then. Working hard all
day long as everybody did (except Johnnie Green, who played hard
enough--goodness knows!), they slept very soundly at night. And two
or three times every summer they were sure to rise late, just by
accident.

Though such a mishap always annoyed Farmer Green, it never troubled
either the hired man or Johnnie in the least. On the contrary, they
seemed to enjoy those occasions. But with Rusty Wren to rouse them
at dawn all that was changed. And Farmer Green remarked one day
that one thing was certain; they would lose no time that summer by
staying in bed too long.

That very afternoon he had to go to the village. And when he came
home he brought several surprises with him.

Those surprises pleased Johnnie and his mother so much that when he
went to bed that night Farmer Green felt even happier than was
usual with him. He went to bed somewhat early because he said he
had more work than ever to do the next day, on account of his
having gone to the village.

But happy as he was that night, the following morning Farmer Green
was quite out of sorts. For the whole family overslept. Not a soul
awaked until the sun had been up at least an hour.

"I don't understand----" Farmer Green said at the breakfast
table--"I don't understand why I failed to hear that wren this
morning. I must have been unusually sleepy."

The hired man helped himself to some more griddle-cakes and
remarked that it was a pity. But somehow he did not _look_ sorry,
in spite of what he said.

"We'll go to bed early to-night," Farmer Green continued, "so we'll
be sure to wake up before sunrise."

And, strange to say, the next morning the very same accident
happened again.

"I don't see what's come over me," said Farmer Green. "I don't hear
that wren singing right under my window any more. I thought that
maybe the cat had caught him. But there he is this very moment, on
that limb!"

Everybody said it certainly was odd, for the wren always sang as
soon as it began to grow light.

Well, that night Farmer Green went to bed before dark, declaring
that he must be up bright and early in the morning.

"I wish that new clock I brought home day before yesterday was an
alarm clock," he said. "Then I wouldn't have to worry about waking
up on time.... Anyhow, I ought to hear the wren again to-morrow
morning."

But Farmer Green hoped in vain. Though the cat had not caught
Rusty, and he had not moved away, either, he no longer sang beneath
Farmer Green's window at dawn.

For three mornings he had gone to the orchard to trill his dawn
song; and though they did not know the reason, that was why the
Green family rose late for three mornings running.

Once Rusty Wren had been proud to be called Farmer Green's alarm
clock. But now something had happened that made him resolve to stop
waking the household.

It was all on account of one of those surprises that Farmer Green
had brought home from the village. For without intending to do any
such thing, Farmer Green had surprised Rusty Wren as well as
Johnnie and his mother.

Now, a surprise may be one of two kinds--pleasant or unpleasant.
And, strangely enough, the very thing that delighted the Green
family sent Rusty Wren into a spasm of jealous rage.

Of course, it was very silly of him to lose his temper. But he was
too upset to stop to think of that.




V

THE NEW BIRD


Farmer Green had not been home long, after his trip to the village,
when Rusty Wren heard a sound that for once made him keep quite
still for at least five seconds.

"Cuckoo! cuckoo!" The cry came from inside the farmhouse. And since
the windows were wide open, Rusty could easily hear it from the
tree near-by, where he lived.

"There's a new bird in there!" Rusty Wren exclaimed to himself as
soon as the sound reached his ears. He listened intently. But the
call was not repeated.

"Farmer Green is not satisfied with my singing!" Rusty cried. And
thereupon he flew into such a rage that when his wife came home, a
few minutes later, she was actually frightened.

"What in the world is the matter?" she asked her husband anxiously.

"Matter?" cried Rusty Wren. "Here I've sung my best for Farmer
Green all summer, and waked him at dawn every morning without fail!
And what do you suppose he's done? He has brought home a strange
bird from the village, because he doesn't care for my singing."

Mrs. Rusty Wren told her husband that he must be mistaken.

"Maybe a bird flew inside the farmhouse by accident," she said.
"What kind of bird is it?" she inquired.

"It _said_ 'Cuckoo!'" Rusty explained. "But if it's a cuckoo, it's
different from any other I've ever heard. You know yourself that
Black Bill Cuckoo who lives in the bushes beyond the orchard says
'_Cow, cow!_'"

"I wouldn't worry, if I were you," Mrs. Rusty advised her husband.
"No doubt this strange bird has already made his escape."

It was then after sunset. And soon Rusty Wren's family were all
fast asleep, without having heard any more bird notes from the
farmhouse.

The next morning Rusty awoke just as the first streaks of gray
showed in the east. He was about to begin his dawn song when
through the kitchen window came that "Cuckoo! cuckoo!" again.

Rusty knew then that the strange bird was still there.

"Did you hear that?" he asked his wife.

She nodded her head silently.

"He's telling Farmer Green that it's time to get up!" Rusty
exclaimed indignantly. "And since Farmer Green has seen fit to get
somebody else to wake him, I certainly shall not trouble myself on
his account any more."

So Rusty Wren flew away to the orchard to sing his dawn song. Jolly
Robin, who lived there, in an old apple tree, was surprised to hear
Rusty Wren singing in that neighborhood so early. And he was still
more astonished at Rusty's melody.

His voice was so much shriller than usual that Jolly Robin knew
instantly that something had displeased him.

"What's happened to upset you?" Jolly Robin inquired, after Rusty
had finished singing.

"I expect to come here and give my dawn song every morning," Rusty
remarked. "And if there's anybody living in the orchard that
objects, he had better move away at once."

Of course Jolly Robin didn't want to do that. And he said as much,
too.

"But I hope you'll sing a little more happily," he told Rusty,
"because I don't like to hear people complaining--and neither does
my wife."

       *       *       *       *       *

It is easy to understand why Farmer Green and his family overslept,
when one knows that Rusty Wren no longer sang his dawn song beneath
Farmer Green's window. And when Rusty saw that the whole household
never stirred until long after sunrise, he was so pleased that he
couldn't help making a few remarks about the new bird in the
farmhouse, which had annoyed him so by singing "Cuckoo! cuckoo!"

"This stranger is a very poor songster!" Rusty said to his wife.
"All he can sing is 'Cuckoo! cuckoo!' in that silly way of his. He
has no trills and runs and ripples at all! And he can't even repeat
his song ten times a minute, as I give mine. He has to wait at
least half an hour before he cries 'Cuckoo! cuckoo!' again. And no
one but a simpleton would ever attempt to awaken a hard-working
farmer by such half-hearted singing."

Mrs. Rusty quite agreed with her husband.

"Farmer Green will be sorry he brought home such a worthless bird,"
she said.




VI

MR. CROW TO THE RESCUE


As time went on, and the Green family overslept each morning, Rusty
began to grow very weary of the monotonous "Cuckoo! cuckoo!" which
came every half hour, all day long, through the kitchen window of
the farmhouse.

"I'd like to know what sort of bird that is!" he exclaimed at last.
"If he'd only come out here in the yard I'd ask him his name--and
tell him what I think of him, too."

But the stranger never stirred out of the kitchen. And at length
Rusty decided to make inquiries about him. Seeing Jimmy Rabbit
passing through the orchard on his way home from the cabbage-patch,
Rusty called to him.

"If you happen to see old Mr. Crow, I wish you would ask him if he
won't please come right over to the orchard," Rusty Wren said.
"There's something I want to find out. And Mr. Crow knows so much
that perhaps he can help me."

Jimmy Rabbit declared that he would be delighted to deliver the
message. And he must have gone out of his way to find Mr. Crow, for
the old gentleman arrived at the orchard in less than sixteen
minutes.

Rusty was waiting for him. And, having explained about the strange
bird as well as he could, he asked Mr. Crow what he thought.

"I'd like to hear his song," said old Mr. Crow.

"Come right over to my tree near the house!" Rusty urged him.

Mr. Crow hesitated.

"Where's Farmer Green?" he inquired.

"Oh! He's working in the hayfield."

"Where's Johnnie Green?" Mr. Crow asked.

"Oh! He's in the hayfield, too, riding on the hayrake," Rusty Wren
explained.

"I'll come with you, then," Mr. Crow croaked.

So they flew to the dooryard. And they hadn't waited there long
when the strange bird sang his "Cuckoo! cuckoo!"

"There!" said Rusty. "That's his silly song!"

And to his surprise Mr. Crow haw-hawed right out.

"What's the joke?" Rusty Wren wanted to know.

"That's not a bird----" said old Mr. Crow--"or, at least, it's not
a _real_ bird. He's made of wood. And he lives inside a cuckoo
clock."

"Ah!" Rusty cried. "An alarm clock!"

But old Mr. Crow shook his head.

"No!" he replied. "It's just an everyday clock. And, instead of
striking, it lets this little wooden bird come out and sing."

Rusty Wren said that he wouldn't care for a clock like that and
that he didn't see why Farmer Green had brought it home, anyhow.

"Cuckoo clocks amuse the women and children," Mr. Crow remarked
wisely.

"Then you think Farmer Green was not dissatisfied with my singing?
You think he would like me to wake him every morning, just as I
used to?" Rusty waited eagerly for Mr. Crow's opinion.

Old Mr. Crow pondered for a while before answering. He reflected
that since it was long past corn-planting time, it really made no
difference to him whether Farmer Green overslept or not. If the
corn had just been put in the ground, he would have liked to have
Farmer Green stay in bed all day long.

"I understand that the whole family enjoys your songs," Mr. Crow
told Rusty at last. "And for the present you may as well sing your
dawn song right here in your own tree, beneath Farmer Green's
window. But if you're living here next spring, I wish you would
consult me again."

Rusty Wren agreed to that, thanking Mr. Crow for his kindness, too.
And, afterward, instead of being angry, he laughed whenever he
heard that silly "Cuckoo! cuckoo!" Since he knew it was only a
wooden bird, Rusty Wren was jealous no longer.

The next morning he awakened Farmer Green at the break o' day. And
the hired man was so sleepy that he fell downstairs and couldn't
work for a whole week.




VII

A NEAT HOUSEKEEPER


Rusty Wren's wife was a very neat housekeeper. Every day she
carefully cleaned her house, chirping while she worked. Sometimes
her voice was sweet and pleasant. But at other times--though it was
still sweet--it was not pleasant at all. And whenever Rusty heard
that second kind of chirp he was always careful to find some errand
that took him away from home.

You see, Rusty Wren was not so orderly as his wife. Often he
scattered things about the house in a very careless fashion.
For instance, if he happened to notice a bit of moss--or a
burr--clinging to his coat, just as likely as not he would brush it
off and let it fall upon the floor. And when Mrs. Rusty found
anything like that in her cottage, she always knew how it came
there.

Rusty sometimes remarked that it was a good thing he didn't smoke.

"How would you like it if I dropped bits of tobacco, or ashes, and
maybe burnt matches for you to pick up?" he asked his wife.

"You couldn't come inside my house if you used tobacco," she always
replied. And she would get quite excited at the mere thought of
such an untidy habit.

And then Rusty would smile--but he always took good care not to let
his wife see him.

"Don't worry!" he would say, if she became too stirred up. "I've
never smoked yet--and I never expect to."

One can see that Rusty Wren was somewhat of a tease. And as it
usually happens with people who amuse themselves at the expense of
others, there came a time when Rusty's teasing landed him in
trouble.

One day after he had come home from an excursion to the pasture (he
seldom strayed so far from home as that!), Mrs. Rusty began
sniffing the air. Her nose would have wrinkled--only it couldn't,
because it was so hard. She looked at her husband suspiciously. And
it seemed to her that he had a guilty manner.

"I declare," she said, "I believe you've been smoking." And she
started to scold so angrily that Rusty Wren knew she must be in a
temper.

Seeing signs of trouble, Rusty began to fidget. And he moved about
so uneasily that his wife was all the surer of his guilt. She
stopped right in the middle of her scolding to say, "I smell
smoke!"

"Perhaps you do," Rusty admitted. "But it's certainly not tobacco
smoke."

"Ah!" she exclaimed. "Then you've been smoking corn-silk, or
hayseed--and that's almost as bad."

But Rusty said that it must be the smoke of a pine stump that she
noticed.

"Farmer Green is burning some old stumps in the pasture," he
explained. "And I flew through a cloud of it."

Just then he happened to notice a bit of something or other
clinging to one of his tail feathers. And though his wife was
looking straight at him, he flicked the tiny scrap upon the floor,
without thinking what he was doing.

"There you go again!" Mrs. Rusty Wren cried. "Here I've just
finished cleaning the house and you're littering it all up! You
don't care how much work you make for me." And she pounced upon the
brownish bit, intending to pick it up and throw it out of the
house.

Rusty had already decided that he had better go away from home for
a little while, until things were pleasanter, when his wife
suddenly faced about and fixed him with her glittering eyes.

"Ha!" she cried, holding up the scrap in her bill for him to see.
"Tobacco!" she screamed. "And what, pray, have you to say to me
now?"




VIII

RUSTY IN TROUBLE


Rusty Wren edged toward the door--that little opening in the syrup
can, only slightly bigger than a twenty-five-cent piece. He wished
he was already safely through it, for he did not like the look in
his wife's eyes.

"I must be going now," he said faintly--though he was generally as
bold as brass.

"Wait a moment!" Mrs. Rusty ordered. "Where did this tobacco come
from?" She spoke somewhat thickly, for she still held the bit of
brown leaf in her bill.

"I can't imagine," he stammered. "I never knew it was sticking to
my tail until I saw it and brushed it off----"

"On my clean floor!" his wife interrupted. "Goodness knows it's bad
enough to have you forever doing things like that without your
bringing _tobacco_ into my clean house--and without smelling of
smoke, too."

For almost the first time in his life Rusty Wren was really
worried. Somehow, he had managed to get into something a good deal
like a scrape. It seemed to him that the house was terribly hot and
stuffy; and always before he had thought it quite comfortable.

"I'm going out for a breath of fresh air," he protested feebly. And
before Mrs. Rusty could stop him he dodged past her and slipped
through the tiny doorway, leaving her to scold to her heart's
content.

All this happened in the middle of the morning. And the cuckoo
clock in Farmer Green's kitchen had sung the hour six times before
Rusty Wren returned.

Never before had he stayed away from his snug house so long. And,
naturally, that made him have a guilty feeling, as if he had really
done something to be ashamed of. As for smoking, he had (as he
said) never smoked in his life. It was true that Farmer Green was
burning stumps in the pasture that morning, and that the odor of
the smoke had clung to Rusty's feathers.

But the bit of tobacco that had clung to his tail was a mystery
that he couldn't explain. It was a most unfortunate accident. But
Rusty hoped that by that time--it was then the middle of the
afternoon--he hoped that his wife had recovered from her
displeasure. Usually, when they had any little difference of
opinion, she felt better if he gave her plenty of time in which to
scold. But now Rusty was not quite sure of his welcome. He had
never seen Mrs. Rusty so upset.

"Are you there, my love?" he asked softly, as he alighted on the
roof of his house. He did not care to go inside until he was quite
sure that his wife was in better spirits.

"The smoker has come home again," a peevish voice called out. And
instead of bursting into the merry song which Rusty had been all
ready to carol, he flew off across the yard and began hunting for
something to eat.

Since he couldn't very well go home, he thought that he might as
well enjoy a good meal, at least.




IX

ALL'S WELL AGAIN


After Rusty Wren had revived his drooping spirits by eating
heartily of three dozen insects of different kinds and sizes, he
felt so cheerful that he couldn't help trilling a few songs. It was
almost evening; and he was glad not to let the sun go down without
thanking him in that way for shining so brightly all day.

Though it was so late, Farmer Green still toiled in the fields; but
Rusty could hear Johnnie and old dog Spot driving the cows down the
lane towards the barn.

Now, above the wide door of the carriage house a window was open--a
window through which Rusty had flown early in the morning. Unlike
old Mr. Crow, Rusty Wren was not in the least afraid to enter any
of the farm buildings. Perhaps if Rusty had been in the habit of
taking Farmer Green's corn he would have thought twice before he
ventured inside the cow barn or the carriage house. But since he
never damaged the crops, and always helped them by destroying a
great number of insects that ate all sorts of growing things, Rusty
had nothing whatever to fear from anybody in the farmhouse--except
the cat, of course.

There was really no reason for Rusty's flying through the open
window, beyond the fact that he liked to prowl around the great,
dusty room under the eaves, to see what he could find. Once he was
inside, he noticed something that had not caught his eye on his
former visit. Hanging from a rafter, where the slanting rays of
the setting sun fell squarely upon it, was a big bunch of brown
tobacco leaves.

Rusty Wren gave a chirp of pleasure at the sight. That was where he
must have picked up the bit of tobacco that had clung to his tail
feathers and upset his wife's good nature.

"I'll go right home and get her and bring her here so she can see
this tobacco herself!" he said aloud. "Then she'll know where that
shred came from which fell on the floor." He did not say "which I
brushed onto the floor," for he never could remember long that he
ever did such careless things.

Well, Rusty Wren went out of the window a good deal faster than he
had flown in. And, in less time than it takes to tell it, he was
perched on top of his house again and calling to his wife.

"I know now where the tobacco came from!" he sang out. "Just come
outside and I'll show you. It's upstairs in the carriage house!"

To his delight, Mrs. Rusty answered in the sweetest tone
imaginable. But she said she didn't want to come out just then. And
she didn't seem a bit interested in tobacco any more.

"You come right into the house!" she cried. "There's something here
that I want to show you."

Rusty Wren whisked through the hole in the maple syrup can. Home
had never looked quite so good to him before, for he had not been
there since the middle of the morning.

"What is it?" he asked eagerly.

His wife was sitting on their nest. And there was nothing new in
the house, so far as he could see.

She moved aside then. "Look!" she said.

And, peering into the nest, Rusty saw a speckled egg there. It was
really a small egg. But to Rusty Wren's eyes it seemed decidedly
big.

He was so surprised that he couldn't speak for as much as two
seconds. And then he began to sing--he was so happy.

Though Mrs. Rusty kept very still, she seemed much pleased. And,
strange to say, she never mentioned _smoking_ to her husband again.

She had something more important to think about.




X

BAD NEWS


When Johnnie Green fastened the tin can to the tree in the dooryard
he couldn't have picked out a better spot for it. Of course, he
hoped that a pair of wrens would build their nest inside the syrup
can. But what he never dreamed was that the cherry tree was exactly
the sort of tree that wrens liked.

It was not that Rusty and his wife cared for cherries. But as soon
as Mrs. Wren had said how much she liked her new house, she
remarked that the old cherry tree was a fine place to hunt for bugs
and insects.

"Yes!" Rusty agreed. "And there's an ant hill near the foot of the
tree. It will be very convenient on stormy days, for we shall not
have to go far for our breakfast."

Not being fond of cherries, they did not look forward to the time
when the bright red fruit should hang gaily upon the branches above
their home. But there were others--besides Johnnie Green--who
eagerly awaited that time and noticed that the old tree was loaded
with blossoms, which meant that later there would be plenty of
cherries.

Jolly Robin was one of those who had a taste for cherries, no
matter whether they grew wild in the woods or within easy reach in
Farmer Green's yard. And as soon as cherry time arrived Jolly was
on hand every day to enjoy the treat.

He was so cheerful and good-natured that Rusty Wren and his wife
did not object to Jolly's visits--so long as he did not venture too
near their house. They always scolded loudly when an outsider came
too close to their home, for they had a big family of children, and
they couldn't help feeling that the youngsters were safer with no
prying busybodies to meddle with them.

Of course, Jolly Robin never once thought of harming any of Rusty's
family. And as soon as he saw that Rusty--and especially his
wife--wanted him to keep away from their side of the tree, he took
care to respect their wishes.

Then all was peaceful. And the three had many pleasant chats
together.

At last, however, Jolly Robin made a remark one day that threw both
Rusty and his wife into a flutter of alarm. Jolly Robin had not
meant to frighten them. But the news was out before he realized
that it was far from welcome to his two little listeners.

"Jasper Jay has heard about these cherries," he announced. "And he
says he's coming over here as soon as he can find time, for he is
specially fond of all kinds of cherries, no matter whether they're
red cherries or black cherries or choke cherries."

Rusty Wren glanced quickly at his wife.

He could easily see that Jolly Robin's speech had upset her. And,
to tell the truth, he did not himself relish the prospect of a
visit from anybody as boisterous and quarrelsome as that famous
bully, Jasper Jay.

"Can't you prevent his coming?" Rusty asked Jolly Robin.

But Jolly Robin shook his head.

"When Jasper Jay makes up his mind, I know of no way to make him
change it," he said.




XI

THE NOISE ON THE ROOF


As soon as she heard that Jasper Jay intended to visit her cherry
tree, to enjoy the ripe fruit, Rusty Wren's wife began to worry.
And she made herself so unhappy that Rusty couldn't help wishing
that Jolly Robin had kept his news to himself.

"Don't be alarmed!" he said to her, after Jolly had gone. "Jasper
Jay can't harm the children, for they'll be safe in the nest. And
luckily our doorway is too small for him."

But Mrs. Rusty wouldn't be calmed.

"He's a great, cruel bully," she replied. "And if he spends much
time here I'm afraid the children will starve, for neither you nor
I will be able to go out and find food for them, because Jasper
would be sure to pounce on us; and what chance would we have
against him?"

"We'll go together," said Rusty Wren, looking very brave.

But Mrs. Wren said she wouldn't think of leaving her six small
children all alone in the house.

"Everything will be all right," Rusty assured her. "You know Jasper
isn't coming unless he can _find the time_. Jolly Robin said so.
And maybe he won't be able to get here at all."

They had gone inside their house to talk over the matter in
private. And Rusty had hardly finished speaking when a loud bang,
followed by a clatter, sounded on the tin roof above their heads.

It was no wonder that they both jumped.

"Goodness!" exclaimed Rusty's wife. "What's that?"

But Rusty couldn't tell her. During all the weeks they had lived
there he had heard nothing like that.

While they listened the noise was repeated. And Mrs. Rusty declared
that the sky must be falling, for she had never heard such a
dreadful sound in all her life.

"I'll go right out and see what it is," Rusty Wren said.

But his wife caught hold of his coat-tails and begged him to stay
with her.

"No! no!" she cried. "You must not stir out of the house. I'd be
terribly worried if you left me alone here with these six small
children. And you might get hurt, besides."

Meanwhile the racket on the roof continued, with only a short pause
between each outburst. The six Wren children began to cry--for they
were hungry as well as frightened. And all the time Mrs. Rusty
clung to her husband's coat-tails and besought him not to leave
her.

To tell the truth, he had no such intention. Though he was very
brave for his size, he was thoroughly alarmed. And for the time
being he was quite content to stay inside his snug house and hope
that the trouble would soon come to an end.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the whole, the Wren family spent a very unpleasant quarter of an
hour. The _bang, clatter, bang_ on their roof still continued until
the din became almost unbearable. And Rusty Wren grew so desperate
that he had almost made up his mind to break away from his wife,
even if he had to leave his coat-tails behind him, and dash out of
doors to see what was the matter.

Then all at once a different sound fell upon their ears. And as
soon as they heard it they knew at once that the sky was not
falling, anyhow.

"_Jay! jay!_" Jasper Jay's harsh voice was unmistakable. He had
been playing one of his sly tricks on the Wren family; and they had
never guessed that it was he!




XII

THE UNWELCOME VISITOR


"It's Jasper Jay!" Rusty Wren cried, as soon as he and his wife
heard the hoarse cry outside their house. "He's playing one of his
tricks on us. And I'm going out and tell him exactly what I think
of him."

"Don't forget to tell him what I think of him, too!" Mrs. Rusty
said, as she let go of her husband's coat-tails.

Then Rusty hurried through the little doorway. And there was
Jasper, sitting on a limb above the house, with a cherry in his
bill, which he let fall with a sly smile.

The cherry struck the roof of Rusty's house with a loud _bang_! And
then came the same _clatter_, to which the Wren family had been
listening.

"Here! Stop that!" Rusty cried.

Jasper Jay shrieked with laughter.

"Go away!" said Rusty.

"Go away yourself!" retorted Jasper.

"This is my home," Rusty Wren told him hotly. "And you've no right
to come here and frighten my wife and children like this."

"How shall I frighten them, then?" Jasper Jay asked him. "Perhaps
you like this way better!" he shouted. And with that he flew
straight at Rusty Wren. He was so big and he looked so cruel that
Rusty turned tail and dashed back into his house again. And he was
glad that his doorway was not much bigger than a twenty-five-cent
piece, because he knew that Jasper Jay could never squeeze through
so small an opening.

Jasper alighted on top of the house and jumped up and down on the
roof, striking it with his bill and screaming angrily.

"Don't be afraid!" Rusty said to his wife. "He can't do any harm.
And after a while he'll grow tired of staying here and he'll go
away."

Well, Rusty was half right, at least. For Jasper Jay went away at
last; but he didn't wait until he had grown weary of his rowdyish
sport.

Now, Johnnie Green happened to hear Jasper's harsh cries. And,
looking out of the window, he saw Jasper's strange performance.

"That blue jay is teasing my little wrens!" Johnnie Green cried
indignantly. And, catching up a potato from the kitchen table, he
hurried to the door and hurled it as hard as he could at the
blue-coated trouble-maker.

The potato missed Jasper Jay by less than an inch, bringing up
_kerplunk!_ against the trunk of the old cherry tree, and breaking
into several pieces.

And then it was Jasper Jay's turn to be alarmed. He jumped off the
roof of Rusty Wren's house as if he had been shot and dashed off as
fast as his handsome wings could carry him. He knew of no way to
tease Johnnie Green; so there was really no sense in his staying in
Farmer Green's yard any longer.

Johnnie jeered at Jasper as the frightened bully hurried away.

"You'd better not come skulking around here again!" he shouted.

Although the cherries hung red and juicy upon the old tree for at
least a week longer, just begging to be picked--as one might
say--Jasper Jay did not come back to enjoy them. He told Jolly
Robin that he was entirely too busy to waste his time in an old
cherry tree.




XIII

BOY WANTED!


It seemed to take Rusty Wren's wife a long time to recover from the
fright that Jasper Jay had given her. He had amused himself by
dropping cherries upon the roof of her house. But the trick had not
amused the Wren family in the least.

Even after Johnnie Green had driven the blue-coated rascal away
from the dooryard Mrs. Rusty Wren was all aflutter. She jumped at
the slightest noise. And she was so nervous that Rusty soon saw
that it was a great effort for her to go abroad for food for their
hungry family.

"You must stay right here at home and rest," he urged her. "I'll
find enough for the children to eat--and for you too," he said
manfully.

And really there was nothing else that his wife could do; for her
nerves were in a frightful state.

So Rusty Wren took up his task cheerfully. He found it no easy one,
either. Feeding six growing youngsters had kept both their parents
working every minute all day long, because the children were always
clamoring for more food. And now they seemed half starved, for they
had had nothing to eat all the time that Jasper Jay had kept Rusty
and his wife hiding in their house.

Rusty Wren, however, was not one to complain, no matter what
happened. And every day from dawn till dark he hurried out of the
house to find some toothsome insect, and bring it home to drop it
into somebody's yawning mouth.

Indeed, he was so busy feeding his family that he scarcely had a
chance to eat anything himself. So he grew quite thin. And though
he still sang as merrily as ever, his wife noticed the change that
had come over him.

Naturally, that made her worry. And since worrying was bad for her
nerves, she began to grow worse instead of better.

"I don't know what's going to become of us," she said at last. "As
the children grow bigger they need more to eat. And I can see
plainly that you're never going to be able to provide enough for
them."

"Oh! they'll soon be old enough to leave home and catch their own
insects," Rusty told her hopefully. "And until that time comes I'll
manage somehow, even if I have to work after dark."

But that plan did not suit his wife at all.

"I shouldn't care to stay alone in the house at night with six
small children," she said. "That will never do."

"I have it!" Rusty cried suddenly. "I'll get somebody to help me!"

Well, his wife didn't think much of that plan, either.

"I don't like the idea of any strange bird coming into my house,"
she objected. "And you know yourself that you've always felt the
same way about strangers."

"I know----" he replied--"but this is different. I'll find a brisk
young fellow somewhere. And after a day or two you won't mind his
being here. He'll seem just like one of the family."

It took a good deal of urging before Mrs. Rusty consented. But at
last she said she was willing to give the plan a trial, though she
felt sure it was bound to cause trouble, somehow.

So that is how Rusty Wren came to hang a sign outside his door,
which said:

                           BOY WANTED




XIV

TOO MANY CALLERS


The news of Rusty Wren's sign, "Boy Wanted," spread like wildfire
through the whole of Pleasant Valley. Rusty had put the sign out at
daybreak. And before sunset as many as fifty of the field and
forest people had come shyly to Farmer Green's dooryard.

Some of them came to apply for the position, and some of them
merely wanted to see the sign--for it was a most unusual sight in
that neighborhood.

There were others, too, such as Fatty Coon and Tommy Fox, who said
that while they didn't care to visit Farmer Green's place in the
daytime, they expected to call there during the night and take a
look at Rusty Wren's home and the odd sign upon it.

Yes! So quiet a person as Rusty Wren, who never wandered far from
home, had become famous in a day.

Yet it proved to be a very bad day for Rusty's family, because he
had almost no time at all in which to try to bring home any food.
No sooner had he talked with one caller than another knocked at his
door. And so the steady stream of strangers kept him busy as a
little red wagon, as Farmer Green would remark.

It was a discouraging business, to say the least. Though Rusty had
advertised for a "boy," persons of all ages appeared and wanted to
work for him. Some of them were old enough to be his grandfather.
And, what was worse, they were all so big that they couldn't
squeeze through Rusty's little round door. (The hole in the syrup
can, you will remember, was only slightly larger than a quarter of
a dollar.)

Of course, there was no use of his hiring a helper that could do
only half the work. What Rusty wanted was somebody that could not
only catch an insect, but bring it right inside the house and drop
it into the mouth of one of his children.

At last when Rusty had almost given up all hope of finding anyone
of the required size, a young English sparrow flew up and said
boldly that he was the very person for the position. He claimed
that he could get in and out of Rusty's door without any trouble.
And he was just about to prove his claim, too, when Rusty Wren
stopped him.

"Wait a moment!" he told the sparrow. "My wife is calling me. And
I must see what she wants."

So he disappeared inside his house, to return shortly with a
doleful look upon his face.

"I'm afraid you won't do," he said to the young English sparrow.

"Ha!" cried the stranger impertinently. "It's easy to see that your
wife rules the house. And, since that's the case, I'm very glad I'm
not going to work for you." He flew away then, with a jeering laugh
which made Rusty Wren feel quite uncomfortable.

Now Mrs. Rusty had overheard the talk outside her door. And she had
no intention of letting any rude, noisy English sparrow--even if he
was a young one--come inside her house.

That was why she called to her husband. And she made the matter so
plain that Rusty knew there was no use of trying to change her
mind for her.

Things were growing worse and worse. The children were all
_cheeping_ for food, until Rusty Wren could hardly endure the
noise.

And he, too, felt painfully hungry.




XV

MR. CHIPPY'S SON


Rusty Wren was hurrying out of his house to find some supper for
his family, when he almost bumped into a young chap who was gazing
at the sign, "Boy Wanted," which still hung outside Rusty's door.

He was a likely-looking lad, who wore a bay cap on his head. And he
had excellent manners, too. He said "Good-evening!" to Rusty very
pleasantly and touched his cap. No doubt he would have taken it off
had it not grown right on his head. "I see you want a boy," he
observed.

"I certainly do!" said Rusty Wren. "What's your name?"

"They call me 'Chippy, Junior,'" the youngster told him.

"Is that so?" Rusty exclaimed. "Then your father must be Mr.
Chippy, who lives in the wild grapevine on the stone wall by the
roadside."

Chippy, Jr., nodded brightly. And when he said, "_Chip, chip, chip,
chip_," Rusty knew that there could be no doubt about it.

"Wait just a moment!" he told Chippy, Jr. "I want to speak to my
wife about you." And then he darted back into his house.

"My dear," he said to Mrs. Rusty, "I've found the very person!
Little Mr. Chippy's son is outside and I'm sure we ought to be glad
to have a modest young man like him to help us."

"He comes from a good family," Mrs. Rusty admitted. "But don't you
know that the Chippys are bigger than we are? Not much bigger, to
be sure. But Mr. Chippy certainly couldn't get through our
doorway."

"Quite true, my love!" Rusty Wren agreed. "But it's his son--not
_he_--that wants to work for us. And this young lad is not full
grown. I should say he was hardly my size."

Though his wife hesitated, she could think of no further objection.
So at last she told Rusty that he might ask Chippy, Jr., to come
back early the next morning.

"But I have a feeling that this is going to lead to trouble," she
said once more. Rusty Wren said, "Nonsense!" He was overjoyed at
the prospect of having a spry young helper. And he hurried out to
tell Mr. Chippy's son that he might start to work at daybreak.

That polite young man touched his cap again, promised that he would
return without fail, and then went _chip-chipping_ away toward
home, for it was already his bedtime.

For all he was still hungry, Rusty Wren slept better that night
than he had for a long while. He felt as if a great load had been
lifted off his shoulders.

He slept so soundly, in fact, that he never waked up all when Fatty
Coon and Tommy Fox came at midnight to view his sign, "Boy Wanted."

They made a good deal of noise, too, grumbling not a little because
there was not the least sign of a sign anywhere they looked.

As soon as he had engaged Chippy, Jr., to work for him, Rusty Wren
had taken down the sign, "Boy Wanted." And so all further callers
were bound to be disappointed.




XVI

THE ACCIDENT


Chippy, Jr., proved to be a great success. Even Mrs. Rusty Wren had
to admit, before he had finished his first day's work, that he was
an agreeable person to have about the house.

"Of course he isn't much of a singer," she remarked to Rusty, "but
he seems to have a quick eye for an insect, and he is kind to the
children. He is very neat, besides. I have watched him sharply,"
she added, "and I haven't caught him tracking any dirt into the
house--nor brushing any off his clothes onto my clean floor,
either."

Rusty, too, declared himself well satisfied with his helper.

"He's a spry worker," he said. "And he can get through our door as
easily as I can. He went in and out of the house two hundred and
fifty-seven times to-day; and not once did he get stuck in the
doorway."

For several days everything went so smoothly in Rusty Wren's
household that his wife began to feel more like herself again.
Jasper Jay did not come near their house to annoy them; and there
was plenty of food for all--thanks to the untiring efforts of
Chippy, Jr. Though she tried her hardest, Mrs. Rusty couldn't think
of anything to worry about. And her husband frequently remarked
that it was a lucky day for all of them when he decided to hire a
boy.

Both Rusty and his wife had quite forgotten the strange feeling of
that good little lady's that some sort of trouble was coming to
them on account of taking an outsider into their house.

So the days passed happily for them. And all the while their six
children were fast growing bigger. The proud parents often remarked
that they had never before known youngsters to change so rapidly.

So interested were Rusty and his wife in their children that they
failed to see that Chippy, Jr., was growing likewise. Indeed, he
now overtopped Rusty by half a head. But the Wrens--both husband
and wife--entirely overlooked that fact.

Neither did they happen to notice that Chippy, Jr., was beginning
to have a good deal of trouble squeezing through the door. For some
reason--due, perhaps, to the way the opening was made--for some
reason he could get into the house more easily than he could get
out of it.

He said nothing about this new difficulty, not wishing to disturb
the happiness of the Wren family, nor find himself out of work,
either.

Since he continued to grow from day to day there could be but one
outcome. And at last when Rusty came home late one afternoon with a
plump insect in his bill he found Chippy, Jr., blocking the
doorway. His head peered through the round opening. And his face
wore a worried expression.

"Hurry up!" said Rusty Wren. "I want to come in."

And at that Chippy, Jr., began to struggle to get out. But he
couldn't move either forward or back.

"Be spry!" Rusty said impatiently. "Don't keep me waiting, boy!"

Chippy, Jr., looked actually frightened.

"I'm stuck fast!" he cried. "I can't move either way!"




XVII

HELP! HELP!


"Help! help!" Rusty Wren called loudly to his wife.

"What's wrong?" she screamed. Since she was inside the house, and
Rusty was outside, with Chippy, Jr., blocking the doorway, of
course she was alarmed--for she couldn't see her husband.

"This boy's stuck fast in our door," Rusty cried. "And you must
help me move him."

"Very well!" she answered in a frightened tone. "But if we can't
stir him, I don't know what we'll do." And she began to shriek.

"Don't worry!" Rusty shouted. "Just say when you're ready."

"I'm ready now," she replied.

"One, two, three--all together!" Rusty Wren commanded. And he
seized the head of Chippy, Jr., and began pulling as hard as he
knew how.

Chippy, Jr., at once let out a frightened cry.

"Stop! stop!" he begged. "I don't know what the trouble is, but I
feel as if I should break in two!"

"Well! well!" exclaimed Rusty Wren. And then to his wife he said:
"Were you pushing or pulling?"

"Pulling!" she explained. "I was tugging on his coat-tails."

"Ah! That was the trouble," Rusty told poor Chippy, Jr., who looked
quite distressed. "I was trying to pull you out; and she was trying
to pull you in. But you mustn't mind a little mistake like that."

"Very well!" said Chippy, Jr., meekly. "But please don't do it
again!"

"Now----" Rusty directed his wife, so that she might understand
clearly what was required of her--"now you must push while I pull."

All their efforts, however, failed to move the unfortunate Chippy,
Jr. He remained wedged tightly in the doorway. And at last Rusty
declared that they might as well stop trying to get him through it.

"What you must do now," he directed his wife, "is to pull on
Chippy, Jr.'s, coat-tails, while I push against his head. And in
that way we may be able to clear our doorway."

That plan worked better. In a short time Mr. Chippy's unlucky son
suddenly slipped backward, knocking Mrs. Rusty Wren flat on her
back. And Rusty himself tumbled into the house and fell on top of
the heap.

As soon as they had picked themselves up, Rusty Wren and his wife
and Chippy, Jr., looked at one another for a few moments without
saying a single word.

Mrs. Rusty was the first to break the silence--if a house may be
said to be silent when there are six children in it, all clamoring
for something to eat.

"I knew we should have some sort of trouble if we took a stranger
into our home," she wailed.

"Why, what's the matter now?" Rusty inquired in surprise.

"Matter?" she groaned. "Here's this great lout of a boy inside our
house! And we'll never be able to get rid of him. Instead of his
helping us to feed our children, we shall have to feed him! And
now we are worse off than we ever were before."




XVIII

THE PUZZLE


Rusty Wren looked quite crestfallen as he listened to his wife's
wail. He wished that he had heeded her warning, when she declared
that his hiring a boy would certainly lead to trouble.

"What's the matter with you?" Rusty asked his helper, Chippy, Jr.
"When you first came to work for us you could slip through our
doorway easily enough. But now you're altogether too big."

Chippy, Jr., said that the entrance to their house must have
shrunk.

"How could it?" Rusty demanded impatiently.

"It rained last night," the youngster reminded him.

But Rusty Wren said, "Nonsense! The doorway's made of tin--not
wood. _You_ have grown--that's the whole trouble! And you've got us
into a pretty fix."

"I begin to think that it was all planned this way by his father,"
Mrs. Rusty told her husband, "so Mr. Chippy wouldn't have to take
care of his son. But I don't intend to adopt a big, overgrown boy
like him--not when I have six small children of my own!"

Chippy, Jr., couldn't help feeling both uncomfortable and unhappy.

"I want to go home!" he blubbered. "It's almost my bedtime. And my
father and my mother won't like it at all if I stay here all
night."

"Well," said Rusty Wren, "I don't know how you're going to leave
our house if you can't squeeze through the door. So I'll hurry
over and tell your father about this trouble, and he can break the
news gently to your mother."

Then Rusty went off, flying directly to the stone wall where the
Chippy family lived. And soon he was explaining to Mr. Chippy how
his son was inside their house and couldn't leave.

Now, Mr. Chippy was unusually mild mannered. But he became greatly
excited as soon as he heard Rusty's story.

"It's just like being caught in a trap!" he exclaimed. "And I can't
help feeling that you've played a trick on my son--probably to
please Johnnie Green.... If you don't set my boy free to-morrow
morning at daybreak, I shall certainly make trouble for you."

Mr. Chippy's warning amazed Rusty Wren. But he couldn't help
laughing at the idea of anybody causing him any _trouble_.

"I'm so deep in trouble now," he told Mr. Chippy, "there's nothing
you can do to make matters any worse for me. I've six growing
children to bring up; and now I have your son to take care of; and
my wife thinks everything is my fault, because I wanted to hire a
boy to help me catch insects.

"So you can't scare me by your threats. I only wish you would come
to my house and take your son away with you--if you can."

"I'll come--and I'll tear your house down!" Mr. Chippy cried
fiercely. And he began screaming, "_Chip, chip, chip, chip_," in a
very shrill voice which was most annoying to hear.

Rusty Wren did not like to listen to him. So he flew back home and
went to bed. He only wished that it were possible for Mr. Chippy
to break into his house and rescue Chippy, Jr. But since the house
was made of tin, Rusty knew that Mr. Chippy was helpless.

"I'll never settle in a tin house again so long as I live!" he
groaned.




XIX

A FRIEND, INDEED


The next morning Rusty Wren awakened with a start. Somebody was
pounding at his door--and shouting his name, as well. He jumped out
of bed to see what was the matter. And, looking outside, he beheld
Mr. Chippy, with sixteen of his cousins, all very much excited--if
one might judge by their actions.

They were flying back and forth past Rusty's doorway and _chipping_
in shrill and piercing tones.

"I've come for my son," Mr. Chippy informed Rusty Wren. "Send him
out here at once or it will be the worse for you."

"I'd be glad to get rid of him if I could," Rusty answered. "But,
as I explained to you last night, he has grown so big that he can
no longer pass through my doorway."

"I don't care to argue with you?" Mr. Chippy replied. "Just let me
have Chippy, Jr., or we'll come inside your house and get him.
We'll make trouble for you, too. Perhaps you didn't know that
kidnapping a child is a very serious act. I've already asked
Solomon Owl's opinion about this matter; and he advises me to take
my child away from you by force, if necessary."

"There's no sense in waiting any longer," one of Mr. Chippy's
cousins interrupted. "Let's go right in and seize the lad!"

At that the mob crowded round Rusty Wren's door. And the pert
gentleman who had just spoken thrust his head through the opening.

That, however, was as far as he was able to go. His shoulders were
altogether too broad for the small, round passage. And though his
relations attempted to push him into the house, they soon saw that
they would never succeed in their undertaking.

"Let me try!" another of Mr. Chippy's cousins cried. But he had no
better luck than the first.

Then each of the fourteen remaining cousins--and then Mr. Chippy
himself--had his turn at the door. But every one of them found that
he was about two sizes too big to squeeze through it.

Rusty Wren, watching then from inside his house, couldn't help
laughing, although it was really no joke.

Though he was usually very mild, Mr. Chippy grew terribly angry
the moment he heard Rusty's laughter. His sixteen cousins began to
scold, too. Again they tried to crowd through Rusty Wren's door.
And they made such an uproar that when Johnnie Green stepped out of
the farmhouse before breakfast he couldn't help noticing them.

"What's going on here?" he cried. And he hurried to his "wren
house," as he called Rusty's home, and drove away the noisy
visitors.

Then he shinned up the old cherry tree, to peep inside it. And as
soon as he reached the tin can which was Rusty's home Johnnie Green
thought he heard an unusual cry within it.

"That doesn't sound like a wren!" he exclaimed. "It sounds exactly
like a chipping sparrow!" Then, as he looked, he saw Chippy, Jr.'s,
head, with its bright bay cap, peer through the mouth of the syrup
can.

"There's a chippy inside my wren house!" Johnnie Green shouted to
his father, who had come to a window to see what was going on. "How
can I get him out?"

"Wait a moment!" said Farmer Green. And soon he came and handed
Johnnie a can-opener.

"Cut out the end of the can!" he directed. "Then you'll be able to
reach in and get the little beggar."

Naturally, Chippy, Jr., did not like to be called a "beggar." But
he couldn't very well prevent Farmer Green from saying whatever he
pleased. So he kept still, while Johnnie Green quickly opened a
great hole in Rusty's house. Then Johnnie carefully lifted Chippy,
Jr., out of his prison and gave him a toss into the air.

That frightened young gentleman wasted no time. He stopped to touch
his cap to nobody, but flew away to his home in the wild grapevine,
on the stone wall, as fast as he could go.

Though he had kept quiet, the whole Wren family had made a great
uproar. Glad as they were to get rid of their troublesome guest,
they objected to having the whole front of their house torn out.

Indeed, Mrs. Rusty began to get ready to move out at once. And
everybody knows that moving is no joke--especially if one has six
children.

But Johnnie Green bent the tin into place again, so that it was
almost the same as new. In fact, the house was even better than
ever, because it was more airy.

And Rusty and his wife were so glad to see the last of Chippy, Jr.,
that afterward they never objected in the least when Johnnie Green
called them "my wrens." They had discovered that he was a good
friend to have.




XX

AN INVITATION


Rusty Wren's cousin, Long Bill, lived in the reeds on the bank of
Black Creek. Although everybody called him "Long Bill," like Rusty
Wren he was actually short and chubby. His bill, however, was much
longer than Rusty's. You see, he belonged to one branch of the
Marsh Wren family; and they all had bills like that.

Long Bill Wren always claimed that his real name was William; but
people generally smiled when he made that statement.

It was not often that Rusty met this cousin of his, for Rusty
seldom ventured so far from home as Black Creek. And being very
fond of water, Long Bill did not care to spend any of his valuable
time in Farmer Green's dooryard.

Of course, there was the duck pond not far away--and the river,
too. But the only water really close to Rusty's home was the
watering-trough. And that was entirely too small to please Long
Bill Wren. So no one ever saw him around the farm buildings.

For a long time Rusty had neither seen nor heard of his cousin,
when one day Jolly Robin knocked at his door.

"I won't come in," said Jolly (of course he couldn't have,
anyhow--being far too big to get through Rusty's door!). "I won't
come in, for I merely want to give you a message. Old Mr. Crow came
to the orchard to-day and he asked me to deliver an invitation
from your cousin who lives near Black Creek."

"That's Long Bill!" Rusty Wren exclaimed.

Jolly Robin nodded. "He's going to have a party," he explained.
"And he wants you to come to it."

"When will it take place?" Rusty asked eagerly.

"To-morrow!" said Jolly Robin.

"It's rather short notice," Rusty Wren observed.

"Mr. Crow has been keeping the message for you for some time,"
Jolly Robin explained. "He said he thought it would be more of a
surprise if you didn't know about the party too soon."

"We'll be there, anyhow," Rusty's wife interrupted behind her
husband's back. She had been listening with a good deal of interest
to Jolly's message.

"But you're not invited," Jolly Robin told her. "This is a men's
party--so Mr. Crow says."

"You may tell old Mr. Crow that my husband won't be able to be
present," Mrs. Rusty Wren snapped. "He's going to be very busy
to-morrow, for he promised to help me with my house-cleaning."

Rusty Wren looked worried. But he said nothing more just then. He
wanted to go to his cousin's party. But he did not like to argue
with his wife, especially in the presence of a neighbor.

Soon Jolly Robin said he must go back to the orchard, because he
had to take care of his children while his wife went out to make a
call.

Mrs. Rusty did not urge him to stay. And, since she seemed upset
over something, Rusty thought it just as well if their visitor did
not linger there too long.

"I was just going to the orchard myself to hunt for insects," said
Rusty. "So I'll go with you."

Mrs. Rusty shot a quick look at him.

"Remember! You're going to be busy at home to-morrow!" she warned
him.

"Yes! yes!" he said. And he seemed in a bit of a hurry to get to
the orchard--it couldn't have been _to get away from home_.




XXI

OFF TO BLACK CREEK


As soon as they reached the orchard, Jolly Robin exclaimed,
"There's old Mr. Crow now, over there on the fence! He's come back
to get your answer and take it to Long Bill Wren. I'll have to tell
him you're sorry--but you're going to be too busy to-morrow to go
to the party."

"Tell him----" said Rusty Wren--"tell him that _although_ I expect
to be busy, I am going to my cousin's party just the same."

Jolly Robin stopped and sat down on a branch of an apple tree, he
was so surprised. "My dear sir!" he cried. "You seem to have
forgotten that your wife said you wouldn't be able to accept Long
Bill's invitation."

"My wife----" said Rusty Wren--"my wife sometimes makes mistakes.
And this is one of them. I wouldn't miss my cousin's party for
anything. And I don't intend to, either."

"Good!" cried Jolly Robin. "I'm glad to see that you don't let your
wife manage your affairs, though I _have_ heard differently about
you, for some people say that----" He stopped abruptly and looked
carefully around. Whatever it may have been that he was about to
say, for some reason he did not care to have his wife hear it. And
he happened to think that perhaps Mrs. Robin might be near-by.

"I don't care what people say," Rusty Wren told him. "When my
cousin gives a party it would be a shame if I couldn't go to it."

"I quite agree with you," said Jolly Robin. "And now I'll go and
give old Mr. Crow your answer."

"One moment!" Rusty Wren exclaimed. "What time will my cousin's
party begin?"

"Five o'clock!" Jolly Robin replied. "And it will last till
sundown."

The next morning Rusty Wren helped his wife so spryly that long
before midday the house-cleaning was finished. Although she tried
her best, Mrs. Rusty could think of no more tasks for her husband
to do--except to feed the children. That was a duty that would not
be finished until they were old enough to leave home and shift for
themselves.

On this day Rusty Wren dropped so many dainties into their gaping
mouths that his wife had to tell him that she didn't dare let the
youngsters have anything more to eat until the next day.

"And now you ought to stay in the house and have a good rest until
just before sunset," she told Rusty. "You've worked very hard ever
since dawn. And I know you're tired."

But Rusty declared that he much preferred to be out of doors
enjoying the fine weather.

His wife looked at him sharply when he said that. All day long
neither of them had mentioned the party which Rusty's cousin, Long
Bill Wren, was going to give at five o'clock that afternoon.

"I think," said Rusty, as he moved about uncomfortably under his
wife's gaze, "I think that since I've a little time to spare I'd
better go and see Mr. Frog, the tailor. You know you've been
telling me that my Sunday coat is beginning to look shiny--and I
suppose I really ought to have a new one."

Mrs. Rusty said that it was true--he did need a new coat. And she
assured her husband that she would be delighted to have him go to
the tailor's.

Now, she did not know that Mr. Frog had moved. She thought his shop
was on the banks of Broad Brook. But that was just another mistake
of hers. And if she had known where his tailoring parlors were then
located, she would certainly have raised a good many objections to
Rusty's visiting them on the day of his cousin's party. For Mr.
Frog's shop was on the banks of Black Creek, where Long Bill Wren
spent his summers.




XXII

THE FORGOTTEN GUEST


The shadows were lengthening--for the sun was far over in the
west--when Rusty Wren reached Mr. Frog's tailor's shop overlooking
Black Creek. Rusty pushed open the door and stepped inside,
expecting to find Mr. Frog sitting cross-legged upon his table and
sewing busily, according to the tailor's custom, until sunset,
which marked the close of Mr. Frog's working day.

But Rusty had hardly entered the shop when he bumped into Mr. Frog
with a crash; for Mr. Frog had been hurrying toward the door.

The collision bowled them both over upon the floor. But Mr. Frog
did not appear annoyed in the least.

"How-dy do!" he said, almost before he had picked himself up. "If
you have come to see me on business, I'm sorry to say that I can't
do anything for you to-day.... The fact is, I'm going to a
singing-party this evening. And I don't want to be late."

"Why--I'm going to a party, too!" Rusty Wren exclaimed.

"You must be mistaken--for there's to be no party here," Mr. Frog
told him.

"Oh! The party I'm going to will be held somewhere else," Rusty
Wren explained.

"That's interesting," said Mr. Frog, as he settled his hat more
firmly upon his queerly shaped head. "Who's having it--if I may
ask?"

Rusty Wren looked at the tailor as if he were much surprised.

"Don't you know about it?" he inquired. "Do you mean to say that my
cousin, Long Bill Wren, didn't invite you?"

For a moment Mr. Frog appeared somewhat taken aback.

"He must have forgotten me," he murmured. "I haven't heard a word
about his party before.... But I know it's a mistake," he added,
with a smile.

"No doubt!" said Rusty Wren politely. "I was going to Cousin Bill's
home as soon as you had measured me for a new Sunday coat," he
explained.

"Then come right along now!" Mr. Frog cried heartily. "We'll go
together. For I'm sure that Long Bill didn't mean to forget me. You
know we're the best of friends. I make all his clothes for him;
and he has never yet paid me a penny."

Rusty Wren hesitated. He was not quite sure that his cousin had
intended to invite the nimble tailor to his party.

"But your singing-party!" he reminded Mr. Frog. "You don't want to
miss that!" he said.

Mr. Frog caught him by a wing and laughed gaily.

"Oh! That doesn't matter," he remarked with a careless air. "We
have a singing-party almost every night. I'd much rather go to your
cousin's."

It is not strange that Rusty Wren should feel a little
uncomfortable at the prospect of arriving at a party with a person
who had received no invitation to it. But he could think of no way
of ridding himself of Mr. Frog's company. So the two started off
together towards the home of Long Bill Wren.

Rusty decided, however, that he would take his cousin to one side
and explain to him in private how the tailor had happened to come
with him.

But he soon found that no such explanation was necessary. For a
certain reason, Long Bill Wren was in no wise annoyed. On the
contrary, he seemed quite pleased.




XXIII

A STRANGE MISTAKE


Not wishing to be late at his cousin's party, which he understood
was to begin at five o'clock, Rusty Wren hurried along the bank of
Black Creek, while Mr. Frog did his best to keep pace with him.

Somewhat out of breath, the two arrived shortly at the home of Long
Bill Wren. And, to their surprise, they saw not the least sign of
any other guests.

"It looks as if we were the first to get here," Rusty Wren
remarked, as they drew near Long Bill's house in the reeds.

"Well, somebody has to be first, you know," the tailor observed
easily. "I always like to be early at a party," he added, "because
then I am sure of getting plenty of refreshments."

If there were no other guests to be seen, neither was there any
indication of a party about Long Bill's home. There was nothing to
eat anywhere in sight; and no flag, nor gay Chinese lantern, nor
decoration of any other kind adorned his house.

Rusty Wren had always thought his cousin's house a strange
dwelling. Made of coarse grasses and reed stalks, it was round,
like a big ball, with a doorway in one side. This queer building
was fastened among the reeds a little distance above the ground.
And it seemed to Rusty Wren that it must be a damp and unhealthful
place to live.

"It's odd that your cousin's not here to greet us," Mr. Frog
croaked.

The words were scarcely out of his large mouth when Long Bill
thrust his head and shoulders out of his door--for he had heard the
voices in his front yard. He had on a shocking old coat--not at all
the sort one would choose to wear when one expected guests.

"Well, well!" he exclaimed. "I'm glad to see you, Cousin Rusty. And
I'm certainly surprised, for it's more than a year since you've
paid me a visit."

"Aren't you glad to see me, too?" Mr. Frog piped up a bit
anxiously.

"Certainly--to be sure!" said Long Bill. "But I'm not so
surprised--though I understand that you usually attend a
singing-party about this time o' day."

"Yes!" said Mr. Frog. "But I'd much prefer to come to yours."

"My what?" inquired Long Bill Wren, as a puzzled look appeared upon
his face.

"Your party, of course!" Mr. Frog replied with a wide smile.

Now, Rusty Wren wished he had not called at Mr. Frog's shop at all.
If he had only come straight to his cousin's house, he thought that
he would have spared himself--and his cousin, too--a good deal of
trouble. And, since he didn't know what to say, he kept still for a
few moments and let the others do all the talking.

Meanwhile, Long Bill hopped briskly outside his house, and joined
them on the ground.

"My party!" he cried. "Why, I know of no party here! Somebody has
made a mistake. I haven't given a party for a year--just a year ago
to-day.... I invited you at that time," he told Rusty Wren, "but
you didn't come. And I never received any word from you about the
matter."

"That's strange!" said Rusty. "This is the first I ever heard of
the affair."

"I engaged Mr. Crow to take your invitation to Jolly Robin in the
orchard and ask him to give it to you," Long Bill informed his
bewildered cousin.

"That's just the way this invitation reached me yesterday!" Rusty
explained.

"Ah! I see it all now," said Long Bill. And he began to laugh
merrily. "Mr. Crow's poor memory is to blame for your mistake. He
forgot to deliver the message last year. And he happened to
remember it only yesterday. So the news reached you just twelve
months too late."

Although Long Bill Wren continued to laugh heartily, neither Mr.
Frog nor Rusty could manage even a faint smile. Having expected a
merry time and plenty to eat, they were both disappointed.

But Mr. Frog soon said that so far as he was concerned, he still
had a singing-party that he could attend, so he didn't feel sad
very long. And, after all, Rusty was glad to see his cousin, Long
Bill Wren. They had a pleasant chat together for almost an hour.
And Long Bill invited Rusty to stay to dinner.

Rusty thanked him and said, no! he must hasten home, because he had
to go to bed early, on account of having to awaken Farmer Green at
dawn the next morning.

When he returned to the old cherry tree Rusty had to answer a good
many questions. His wife wanted to know what had kept him so long,
and what Mr. Frog said, and what color his new Sunday coat was
going to be.

When she learned that her husband's visit to the tailor had been
all in vain, she looked very suspicious and said quickly:

"You haven't been at a party, have you?"

"No, indeed!" Rusty Wren replied. "I haven't gone to a party for
more than a year."

And he seemed quite indignant that his wife should have such a
strange idea in her head.


     THE END




[Illustration: The Umbrella Seemed to be Very Heavy]

[Illustration: Kiddie Faced Leaper the Locust]

[Illustration: Freddie Sat on Top of the Banner]

[Illustration: "He's A Peaceable Fellow," Said Jolly Robin]

[Illustration: Mr. Frog Looked Over Mr. Crow's New Coat]

[Illustration: "Good Morning, My Dear!" Said Mrs. Flicker.]

[Illustration: Buster Shouted For Everybody to Keep Quiet.]

[Illustration: Freddie Was Bumped Into By Jennie Junebug]




[Illustration]

JOLLY BOOKS FOR
LITTLE FOLK

_Parents of boys and girls from three to eight years of age are
assured by the names of such famous authors of children's books as
Arthur Scott Bailey, Lillian Elizabeth Roy and David Cory that
these little books will prove both entertaining and instructional.
They are all bound in cloth with colored end papers, black and
white illustrations and colored wrappers._


TUCK-ME-IN TALES--_by Arthur Scott Bailey_

These delightful stories in which well known birds and insects are
the characters are based upon actual natural history facts, and
while the youngster eagerly listens to them, a moral foundation of
deeper importance is being laid. The complete list of titles in
this series is on inside front flap of this wrapper.


THE LITTLE WASHINGTON BOOKS--_by Lillian Elizabeth Roy_

In these little stories two families of young cousins, all
descendants of George Washington, conceive the clever idea of
carrying out in their play the dramatic events of Washington's
life. Every boy and girl will receive a true and unforgettable
picture of the great career of the Father of His Country through
the play acting of these ingenious youngsters. See flap of this
wrapper for complete list.


LITTLE JOURNEYS TO HAPPYLAND--_by David Cory_

Children will recognize in these amusing adventures characters they
know and love. Mr. Cory is the author of the famous "Little Jack
Rabbit" stories and is one of the best known authors of children's
books of our times. See flap of this wrapper for complete list of
titles.


GROSSET & DUNLAP
_Publishers_
NEW YORK



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALE OF RUSTY WREN***


******* This file should be named 25824.txt or 25824.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/5/8/2/25824



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
