The Project Gutenberg EBook of Christmas Eve, by Robert Browning

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Christmas Eve

Author: Robert Browning

Posting Date: March 16, 2014 [EBook #6670]
Release Date: October, 2004
First Posted: January 12, 2003
Last Updated: February 4, 2008

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHRISTMAS EVE ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team. HTML version by Al
Haines.










  CHRISTMAS EVE

  ROBERT BROWNING



  I

  Out of the little chapel I burst
    Into the fresh night-air again.
  Five minutes full, I waited first
    In the doorway, to escape the rain
  That drove in gusts down the common's centre
    At the edge of which the chapel stands,
  Before I plucked up heart to enter.
    Heaven knows how many sorts of hands
  Reached past me, groping for the latch
  Of the inner door that hung on catch
  More obstinate the more they fumbled,
    Till, giving way at last with a scold
  Of the crazy hinge, in squeezed or tumbled
    One sheep more to the rest in fold,
  And left me irresolute, standing sentry
  In the sheepfold's lath-and-plaster entry,
  Six feet long by three feet wide,
  Partitioned off from the vast inside--
    I blocked up half of it at least.
  No remedy; the rain kept driving.
    They eyed me much as some wild beast,
  That congregation, still arriving,
  Some of them by the main road, white
  A long way past me into the night,
  Skirting the common, then diverging;
  Not a few suddenly emerging
  From the common's self thro' the paling-gaps
  --They house in the gravel-pits perhaps,
  Where the road stops short with its safeguard border
  Of lamps, as tired of such disorder;--
  But the most turned in yet more abruptly
    From a certain squalid knot of alleys,
  Where the town's bad blood once slept corruptly,
    Which now the little chapel rallies
  And leads into day again,--its priestliness
  Lending itself to hide their beastliness
  So cleverly (thanks in part to the mason),
  And putting so cheery a whitewashed face on
  Those neophytes too much in lack of it,
    That, where you cross the common as I did,
    And meet the party thus presided,
  "Mount Zion" with Love-lane at the back of it,
  They front you as little disconcerted
  As, bound for the hills, her fate averted,
  And her wicked people made to mind him,
  Lot might have marched with Gomorrah
  behind him.


  II

  Well, from the road, the lanes or the common,
  In came the flock: the fat weary woman,
  Panting and bewildered, down-clapping
    Her umbrella with a mighty report,
  Grounded it by me, wry and flapping,
    A wreck of whalebones; then, with snort,
  Like a startled horse, at the interloper
  (Who humbly knew himself improper,
  But could not shrink up small enough)
  --Round to the door, and in,--the gruff
  Hinge's invariable scold
  Making my very blood run cold.
  Prompt in the wake of her, up-pattered
  On broken clogs, the many-tattered
  Little old-faced peaking sister-turned-mother
  Of the sickly babe she tried to smother
  Somehow up, with its spotted face,
  From the cold, on her breast, the one warm place;
  She too must stop, wring the poor ends dry
  Of a draggled shawl, and add thereby
  Her tribute to the door-mat, sopping
  Already from my own clothes' dropping,
  Which yet she seemed to grudge I should stand on:
    Then, stooping down to take off her pattens,
    She bore them defiantly, in each hand one,
  Planted together before her breast
  And its babe, as good as a lance in rest.
    Close on her heels, the dingy satins
  Of a female something, past me flitted,
    With lips as much too white, as a streak
    Lay far too red on each hollow cheek;
  And it seemed the very door-hinge pitied
  All that was left of a woman once,
  Holding at least its tongue for the nonce.
  Then a tall yellow man, like the Penitent Thief,
  With his jaw bound up in a handkerchief,
  And eyelids screwed together tight,
  Led himself in by some inner light.
  And, except from him, from each that entered,
    I got the same interrogation--
  "What, you the alien, you have ventured
    "To take with us, the elect, your station?
  "A carer for none of it, a Gallio!"--
    Thus, plain as print, I read the glance
  At a common prey, in each countenance
    As of huntsman giving his hounds the tallyho.
  And, when the door's cry drowned their wonder,
    The draught, it always sent in shutting,
  Made the flame of the single tallow candle
  In the cracked square lantern I stood under,
    Shoot its blue lip at me, rebutting
  As it were, the luckless cause of scandal:
  I verily fancied the zealous light
  (In the chapel's secret, too!) for spite
  Would shudder itself clean off the wick,
  With the airs of a Saint John's Candlestick.
   [Footnote: See Rev. i. 20.]
  There was no standing it much longer.
  "Good folks," thought I, as resolve grew stronger,
  "This way you perform the Grand-Inquisitor
  "When the weather sends you a chance visitor?
  "You are the men, and wisdom shall die with you,
  "And none of the old Seven Churches vie with you!
  "But still, despite the pretty perfection
    "To which you carry your trick of exclusiveness,
  "And, taking God's word under wise protection,
    "Correct its tendency to diffusiveness,
  "And bid one reach it over hot ploughshares,--
    "Still, as I say, though you've found salvation,
  "If I should choose to cry, as now, 'Shares!'--
    "See if the best of you bars me my ration!
  "I prefer, if you please, for my expounder
  "Of the laws of the feast, the feast's own Founder;
  "Mine's the same right with your poorest and sickliest
    "Supposing I don the marriage vestiment:
    "So shut your mouth and open your Testament,
  "And carve me my portion at your quickliest!"
  Accordingly, as a shoemaker's lad
    With wizened face in want of soap,
    And wet apron wound round his waist like a rope,
  (After stopping outside, for his cough was bad,
  To get the fit over, poor gentle creature,
  And so avoid disturbing the preacher)
  --Passed in, I sent my elbow spikewise
  At the shutting door, and entered likewise,
  Received the hinge's accustomed greeting,
    And crossed the threshold's magic pentacle,
    And found myself in full conventicle,
  --To wit, in Zion Chapel Meeting,
  On the Christmas-Eve of 'Forty-nine,
    Which, calling its flock to their special clover,
    Found all assembled and one sheep over,
  Whose lot, as the weather pleased, was mine.


  III

  I very soon had enough of it.
    The hot smell and the human noises,
  And my neighbour's coat, the greasy cuff of it,
    Were a pebble-stone that a child's hand poises,
  Compared with the pig-of-lead-like pressure
    Of the preaching man's immense stupidity,
  As he poured his doctrine forth, full measure,
    To meet his audience's avidity.
  You needed not the wit of the Sibyl
    To guess the cause of it all, in a twinkling:
    No sooner our friend had got an inkling
  Of treasure hid in the Holy Bible,
  (Whene'er 'twas the thought first struck him,
  How death, at unawares, might duck him
  Deeper than the grave, and quench
  The gin-shop's light in hell's grim drench)
  Than he handled it so, in fine irreverence,
    As to hug the book of books to pieces:
  And, a patchwork of chapters and texts in severance,
    Not improved by the private dog's-ears and creases,
  Having clothed his own soul with, he'd fain see equipt yours,--
  So tossed you again your Holy Scriptures.
  And you picked them up, in a sense, no doubt:
    Nay, had but a single face of my neighbours
    Appeared to suspect that the preacher's labours
  Were help which the world could be saved without,
  'Tis odds but I might have borne in quiet
  A qualm or two at my spiritual diet,
  Or (who can tell?) perchance even mustered
    Somewhat to urge in behalf of the sermon:
  But the flock sat on, divinely flustered,
    Sniffing, methought, its dew of Hermon
  With such content in every snuffle,
  As the devil inside us loves to ruffle.
  My old fat woman purred with pleasure,
    And thumb round thumb went twirling faster,
  While she, to his periods keeping measure,
    Maternally devoured the pastor.
  The man with the handkerchief untied it,
  Showed us a horrible wen inside it,
  Gave his eyelids yet another screwing,
  And rocked himself as the woman was doing.
  The shoemaker's lad, discreetly choking,
  Kept down his cough. 'Twas too provoking!
  My gorge rose at the nonsense and stuff of it;
    So, saying like Eve when she plucked the apple,
    "I wanted a taste, and now there's enough of it,"
  I flung out of the little chapel.


  IV

  There was a lull in the rain, a lull
    In the wind too; the moon was risen,
  And would have shone out pure and full,
    But for the ramparted cloud-prison,
  Block on block built up in the West,
  For what purpose the wind knows best,
  Who changes his mind continually.
  And the empty other half of the sky
  Seemed in its silence as if it knew
  What, any moment, might look through
  A chance gap in that fortress massy:--
    Through its fissures you got hints
    Of the flying moon, by the shifting tints,
  Now, a dull lion-colour, now, brassy
  Burning to yellow, and whitest yellow,
  Like furnace-smoke just ere flames bellow,
  All a-simmer with intense strain
  To let her through,--then blank again,
  At the hope of her appearance failing.
  Just by the chapel, a break in the railing
  Shows a narrow path directly across;
  'Tis ever dry walking there, on the moss--
  Besides, you go gently all the way uphill.
    I stooped under and soon felt better;
  My head grew lighter, my limbs more supple,
    As I walked on, glad to have slipt the fetter.
  My mind was full of the scene I had left,
    That placid flock, that pastor vociferant,
    --How this outside was pure and different!
  The sermon, now--what a mingled weft
  Of good and ill! Were either less,
    Its fellow had coloured the whole distinctly;
  But alas for the excellent earnestness,
    And the truths, quite true if stated succinctly,
  But as surely false, in their quaint presentment,
  However to pastor and flock's contentment!
  Say rather, such truths looked false to your eyes,
    With his provings and parallels twisted and twined,
  Till how could you know them, grown double their size
    In the natural fog of the good man's mind,
  Like yonder spots of our roadside lamps,
  Haloed about with the common's damps?
  Truth remains true, the fault's in the prover;
    The zeal was good, and the aspiration;
  And yet, and yet, yet, fifty times over,
    Pharaoh received no demonstration,
  By his Baker's dream of Basket Three,
  Of the doctrine of the Trinity,--
  Although, as our preacher thus embellished it,
  Apparently his hearers relished it
  With so unfeigned a gust--who knows if
  They did not prefer our friend to Joseph?
  But so it is everywhere, one way with all of them!
    These people have really felt, no doubt,
  A something, the motion they style the Call of them;
    And this is their method of bringing about,
  By a mechanism of words and tones,
   (So many texts in so many groans)
  A sort of reviving and reproducing,
    More or less perfectly, (who can tell?)
  The mood itself, which strengthens by using;
    And how that happens, I understand well.
  A tune was born in my head last week,
  Out of the thump-thump and shriek-shriek
    Of the train, as I came by it, up from Manchester;
  And when, next week, I take it back again,
  My head will sing to the engine's clack again,
    While it only makes my neighbour's haunches stir,
  --Finding no dormant musical sprout
  In him, as in me, to be jolted out.
  'Tis the taught already that profits by teaching;
  He gets no more from the railway's preaching
    Than, from this preacher who does the rail's office, I:
  Whom therefore the flock cast a jealous eye on.
  Still, why paint over their door "Mount Zion,"
  To which all flesh shall come, saith the prophecy?


  V

  But wherefore be harsh on a single case?
    After how many modes, this Christmas Eve,
  Does the self-same weary thing take place?
    The same endeavour to make you believe,
  And with much the same effect, no more:
    Each method abundantly convincing,
  As I say, to those convinced before,
    But scarce to be swallowed without wincing
  By the not-as-yet-convinced. For me,
  I have my own church equally:
  And in this church my faith sprang first!
    (I said, as I reached the rising ground,
  And the wind began again, with a burst
    Of rain in my face, and a glad rebound
  From the heart beneath, as if, God speeding me,
  I entered his church-door, nature leading me)
  --In youth I look to these very skies,
  And probing their immensities,
  I found God there, his visible power;
    Yet felt in my heart, amid all its sense
    Of the power, an equal evidence
  That his love, there too, was the nobler dower.
  For the loving worm within its clod,
  Were diviner than a loveless god
  Amid his worlds, I will dare to say.
    You know what I mean: God's all, man's nought:
    But also, God, whose pleasure brought
  Man into being, stands away
    As it were a handbreadth off, to give
  Room for the newly-made to live,
  And look at him from a place apart,
  And use his gifts of brain and heart,
  Given, indeed, but to keep for ever.
  Who speaks of man, then, must not sever
  Man's very elements from man,
  Saying, "But all is God's"--whose plan
  Was to create man and then leave him
  Able, his own word saith, to grieve him
  But able to glorify him too,
  As a mere machine could never do,
  That prayed or praised, all unaware
  Of its fitness for aught but praise and prayer,
  Made perfect as a thing of course.
  Man, therefore, stands on his own stock
  Of love and power as a pin-point rock:
  And, looking to God who ordained divorce
  Of the rock from his boundless continent,
  Sees, in his power made evident,
  Only excess by a million-fold
  O'er the power God gave man in the mould.
  For, note: man's hand, first formed to carry
  A few pounds' weight, when taught to marry
  Its strength with an engine's, lifts a mountain,
    --Advancing in power by one degree;
    And why count steps through eternity?
  But love is the ever-springing fountain:
  Man may enlarge or narrow his bed
  For the water's play, but the water-head--
  How can he multiply or reduce it?
    As easy create it, as cause it to cease;
  He may profit by it, or abuse it,
    But 'tis not a thing to bear increase
  As power does: be love less or more
    In the heart of man, he keeps it shut
    Or opes it wide, as he pleases, but
  Love's sum remains what it was before.
  So, gazing up, in my youth, at love
  As seen through power, ever above
  All modes which make it manifest,
  My soul brought all to a single test--
  That he, the Eternal First and Last,
  Who, in his power, had so surpassed
  All man conceives of what is might,--
  Whose wisdom, too, showed infinite,
  --Would prove as infinitely good;
  Would never, (my soul understood,)
  With power to work all love desires,
  Bestow e'en less than man requires;
  That he who endlessly was teaching,
  Above my spirit's utmost reaching,
  What love can do in the leaf or stone,
  (So that to master this alone,
  This done in the stone or leaf for me,
  I must go on learning endlessly)
  Would never need that I, in turn,
    Should point him out defect unheeded,
  And show that God had yet to learn
    What the meanest human creature needed,
  --Not life, to wit, for a few short years,
  Tracking his way through doubts and fears,
  While the stupid earth on which I stay
    Suffers no change, but passive adds
    Its myriad years to myriads,
  Though I, he gave it to, decay,
  Seeing death come and choose about me,
  And my dearest ones depart without me.
  No: love which, on earth, amid all the shows of it,
    Has ever been seen the sole good of life in it,
  The love, ever growing there, spite of the strife in it.
    Shall arise, made perfect, from death's repose of it,
  And I shall behold thee, face to face,
  O God, and in thy light retrace
  How in all I loved here, still wast thou!
  Whom pressing to, then, as I fain would now,
  I shall find as able to satiate
    The love, thy gift, as my spirit's wonder
  Thou art able to quicken and sublimate,
    With this sky of thine, that I now walk under,
  And glory in thee for, as I gaze
  Thus, thus! Oh, let men keep their ways
  Of seeking thee in a narrow shrine--
  Be this my way! And this is mine!


  VI

  For lo, what think you? suddenly
  The rain and the wind ceased, and the sky
  Received at once the full fruition
  Of the moon's consummate apparition.
  The black cloud-barricade was riven,
  Ruined beneath her feet, and driven
  Deep in the West; while, bare and breathless,
    North and South and East lay ready
  For a glorious thing that, dauntless, deathless,
    Sprang across them and stood steady.
  'Twas a moon-rainbow, vast and perfect,
  From heaven to heaven extending, perfect
  As the mother-moon's self, full in face.
  It rose, distinctly at the base
    With its seven proper colours chorded,
  Which still, in the rising, were compressed,
  Until at last they coalesced,
    And supreme the spectral creature lorded
  In a triumph of whitest white,--
  Above which intervened the night.
  But above night too, like only the next,
    The second of a wondrous sequence,
    Reaching in rare and rarer frequence,
  Till the heaven of heavens were circumflexed,
  Another rainbow rose, a mightier,
  Fainter, flushier and flightier,--
  Rapture dying along its verge.
  Oh, whose foot shall I see emerge,
  Whose, from the straining topmost dark,
  On to the keystone of that arc?


  VII

  This sight was shown me, there and then,--
  Me, out of a world of men,
  Singled forth, as the chance might hap
  To another if, in a thunderclap
  Where I heard noise and you saw flame,
  Some one man knew God called his name.
  For me, I think I said, "Appear!
  "Good were it to be ever here.
  "If thou wilt, let me build to thee
  "Service-tabernacles three,
  "Where, forever in thy presence,
  "In ecstatic acquiescence,
  "Far alike from thriftless learning
  "And ignorance's undiscerning,
  "I may worship and remain!"
    Thus at the show above me, gazing
  With upturned eyes, I felt my brain
    Glutted with the glory, blazing
  Throughout its whole mass, over and under
  Until at length it burst asunder
  And out of it bodily there streamed,
  The too-much glory, as it seemed,
  Passing from out me to the ground,
  Then palely serpentining round
  Into the dark with mazy error.


  VIII

  All at once I looked up with terror.
  He was there.
  He himself with his human air.
  On the narrow pathway, just before.
  I saw the back of him, no more--
  He had left the chapel, then, as I.
  I forgot all about the sky.
  No face: only the sight
  Of a sweepy garment, vast and white,
  With a hem that I could recognize.
  I felt terror, no surprise;
  My mind filled with the cataract,
  At one bound of the mighty fact.
  "I remember, he did say
    "Doubtless that, to this world's end,
  "Where two or three should meet and pray,
    "He would be in their midst, their friend;
  "Certainly he was there with them!"
    And my pulses leaped for joy
    Of the golden thought without alloy,
  Then I saw his very vesture's hem.
  Then rushed the blood back, cold and clear,
  With a fresh enhancing shiver of fear;
  And I hastened, cried out while I pressed
  To the salvation of the vest,
  "But not so, Lord! It cannot be
  "That thou, indeed, art leaving me--
  "Me, that have despised thy friends!
  "Did my heart make no amends?
  "Thou art the love of God--above
  "His power, didst hear me place his love,
  "And that was leaving the world for thee.
  "Therefore thou must not turn from me
  "As I had chosen the other part!
  "Folly and pride o'ercame my heart.
  "Our best is bad, nor bears thy test;
  "Still, it should be our very best.
  "I thought it best that thou, the spirit,
    "Be worshipped in spirit and in truth,
  "And in beauty, as even we require it--
    "Not in the forms burlesque, uncouth,
  "I left but now, as scarcely fitted
  "For thee: I knew not what I pitied.
  "But, all I felt there, right or wrong,
  "What is it to thee, who curest sinning?
  "Am I not weak as thou art strong?
    "I have looked to thee from the beginning,
  "Straight up to thee through all the world
  "Which, like an idle scroll, lay furled
  "To nothingness on either side:
  "And since the time thou wast descried,
  "Spite of the weak heart, so have I
  "Lived ever, and so fain would die,
  "Living and dying, thee before!
  "But if thou leavest me----"


  IX

                              Less or more,
  I suppose that I spoke thus.
  When,--have mercy, Lord, on us!
  The whole face turned upon me full.
    And I spread myself beneath it,
    As when the bleacher spreads, to seethe it
  In the cleansing sun, his wool,--
  Steeps in the flood of noontide whiteness
    Some denied, discoloured web--
  So lay I, saturate with brightness.
    And when the flood appeared to ebb,
  Lo, I was walking, light and swift,
    With my senses settling fast and steadying,
  But my body caught up in the whirl and drift
    Of the vesture's amplitude, still eddying
  On, just before me, still to be followed,
    As it carried me after with its motion:
  What shall I say?--as a path were hollowed
    And a man went weltering through the ocean,
  Sucked along in the flying wake
  Of the luminous water-snake.
  Darkness and cold were cloven, as through
  I passed, upborne yet walking too.
  And I turned to myself at intervals,--
  "So he said, so it befalls.
  "God who registers the cup
    "Of mere cold water, for his sake
  "To a disciple rendered up,
    "Disdains not his own thirst to slake
  "At the poorest love was ever offered:
  "And because my heart I proffered,
  "With true love trembling at the brim,
  "He suffers me to follow him
  "For ever, my own way,--dispensed
  "From seeking to be influenced
  "By all the less immediate ways
    "That earth, in worships manifold,
  "Adopts to reach, by prayer and praise,
    "The garment's hem, which, lo, I hold!"


  X

  And so we crossed the world and stopped.
    For where am I, in city or plain,
    Since I am 'ware of the world again?
  And what is this that rises propped
  With pillars of prodigious girth?
  Is it really on the earth,
  This miraculous Dome of God?
  Has the angel's measuring-rod
  Which numbered cubits, gem from gem,
  'Twixt the gates of the New Jerusalem,
  Meted it out,--and what he meted,
  Have the sons of men completed?
  --Binding, ever as he bade,
  Columns in the colonnade
  With arms wide open to embrace
  The entry of the human race
  To the breast of... what is it, yon building,
  Ablaze in front, all paint and gilding,
  With marble for brick, and stones of price
  For garniture of the edifice?
  Now I see; it is no dream;
  It stands there and it does not seem;
  For ever, in pictures, thus it looks,
  And thus I have read of it in books
  Often in England, leagues away,
  And wondered how these fountains play,
  Growing up eternally
  Each to a musical water-tree,
  Whose blossoms drop, a glittering boon,
  Before my eyes, in the light of the moon,
  To the granite layers underneath.
  Liar and dreamer in your teeth!
  I, the sinner that speak to you,
  Was in Rome this night, and stood, and knew
  Both this and more. For see, for see,
  The dark is rent, mine eye is free
  To pierce the crust of the outer wall,
  And I view inside, and all there, all,
  As the swarming hollow of a hive,
  The whole Basilica alive!
  Men in the chancel, body and nave,
  Men on the pillars' architrave,
  Men on the statues, men on the tombs
  With popes and kings in their porphyry wombs,
  All famishing in expectation
  Of the main-altar's consummation.
  For see, for see, the rapturous moment
  Approaches, and earth's best endowment
  Blends with heaven's; the taper-fires
  Pant up, the winding brazen spires
  Heave loftier yet the baldachin; [Footnote: Canopy over the High Altar.]
  The incense-gaspings, long kept in,
  Suspire in clouds; the organ blatant
  Holds his breath and grovels latent,
  As if God's hushing finger grazed him,
  (Like Behemoth when he praised him)
  At the silver bell's shrill tinkling,
  Quick cold drops of terror sprinkling
  On the sudden pavement strewed
  With faces of the multitude.
  Earth breaks up, time drops away,
  In flows heaven, with its new day
  Of endless life, when He who trod,
  Very man and very God,
  This earth in weakness, shame and pain,
  Dying the death whose signs remain
  Up yonder on the accursed tree,--
  Shall come again, no more to be
  Of captivity the thrall,
  But the one God, All in all,
  King of kings, Lord of lords,
  As His servant John received the words,
  "I died, and live for evermore!"


  XI

  Yet I was left outside the door.
  "Why sit I here on the threshold-stone
  "Left till He return, alone
  "Save for the garment's extreme fold
  "Abandoned still to bless my hold?"
  My reason, to my doubt, replied,
  As if a book were opened wide,
  And at a certain page I traced
  Every record undefaced,
  Added by successive years,--
  The harvestings of truth's stray ears
  Singly gleaned, and in one sheaf
  Bound together for belief.
  Yes, I said--that he will go
  And sit with these in turn, I know.
  Their faith's heart beats, though her head swims
  Too giddily to guide her limbs,
  Disabled by their palsy-stroke
  From propping mine. Though Rome's gross yoke
  Drops off, no more to be endured,
  Her teaching is not so obscured
  By errors and perversities,
  That no truth shines athwart the lies:
  And he, whose eye detects a spark
  Even where, to man's, the whole seems dark,
  May well see flame where each beholder
  Acknowledges the embers smoulder.
  But I, a mere man, fear to quit
  The clue God gave me as most fit
  To guide my footsteps through life's maze,
  Because himself discerns all ways
  Open to reach him: I, a man
  Able to mark where faith began
  To swerve aside, till from its summit
  Judgment drops her damning plummet,
  Pronouncing such a fatal space
  Departed from the founder's base:
  He will not bid me enter too,
  But rather sit, as now I do,
  Awaiting his return outside.
  --'Twas thus my reason straight replied
  And joyously I turned, and pressed
  The garment's skirt upon my breast,
  Until, afresh its light suffusing me,
  My heart cried--What has been abusing me
  That I should wait here lonely and coldly,
  Instead of rising, entering boldly,
  Baring truth's face, and letting drift
  Her veils of lies as they choose to shift?
  Do these men praise him? I will raise
  My voice up to their point of praise!
  I see the error; but above
  The scope of error, see the love.--
  Oh, love of those first Christian days!
  --Fanned so soon into a blaze,
  From the spark preserved by the trampled sect,
  That the antique sovereign Intellect
  Which then sat ruling in the world,
  Like a change in dreams, was hurled
  From the throne he reigned upon:
  You looked up and he was gone.
  Gone, his glory of the pen!
  --Love, with Greece and Rome in ken,
  Bade her scribes abhor the trick
  Of poetry and rhetoric,
  And exult with hearts set free,
  In blessed imbecility
  Scrawled, perchance, on some torn sheet
  Leaving Sallust incomplete
  Gone, his pride of sculptor, painter!
  --Love, while able to acquaint her
  While the thousand statues yet
  Fresh from chisel, pictures wet
  From brush, she saw on every side,
  Chose rather with an infant's pride
  To frame those portents which impart
  Such unction to true Christian Art.
  Gone, music too! The air was stirred
  By happy wings: Terpander's* bird
  *[Footnote: Terpander, a famous Lesbian musician and lyric poet, 670 B.C.]
  (That, when the cold came, fled away)
  Would tarry not the wintry day,--
  As more-enduring sculpture must,
  Till filthy saints rebuked the gust
  With which they chanced to get a sight
  Of some dear naked Aphrodite
  They glanced a thought above the toes of,
  By breaking zealously her nose off.
  Love, surely, from that music's lingering,
  Might have filched her organ-fingering,
  Nor chosen rather to set prayings
  To hog-grunts, praises to horse-neighings.
  Love was the startling thing, the new:
  Love was the all-sufficient too;
  And seeing that, you see the rest:
  As a babe can find its mother's breast
  As well in darkness as in light,
  Love shut our eyes, and all seemed right.
  True, the world's eyes are open now:
  --Less need for me to disallow
  Some few that keep Love's zone unbuckled,
  Peevish as ever to be suckled,
  Lulled by the same old baby-prattle
  With intermixture of the rattle,
  When she would have them creep, stand steady
  Upon their feet, or walk already,
  Not to speak of trying to climb.
  I will be wise another time,
  And not desire a wall between us,
    When next I see a church-roof cover
  So many species of one genus,
    All with foreheads bearing _lover_
  Written above the earnest eyes of them;
    All with breasts that beat for beauty,
  Whether sublimed, to the surprise of them,
    In noble daring, steadfast duty,
  The heroic in passion, or in action,--
  Or, lowered for sense's satisfaction,
  To the mere outside of human creatures,
  Mere perfect form and faultless features.
  What? with all Rome here, whence to levy
    Such contributions to their appetite,
  With women and men in a gorgeous bevy,
    They take, as it were, a padlock, clap it tight
  On their southern eyes, restrained from
    feeding
  On the glories of their ancient reading,
  On the beauties of their modern singing,
  On the wonders of the builder's bringing,
  On the majesties of Art around them,--
    And, all these loves, late struggling incessant,
  When faith has at last united and bound them,
    They offer up to God for a present?
  Why, I will, on the whole, be rather proud of it,--
    And, only taking the act in reference
  To the other recipients who might have allowed it,
    I will rejoice that God had the preference.


  XII

  So I summed up my new resolves:
    Too much love there can never be.
  And where the intellect devolves
    Its function on love exclusively,
  I, a man who possesses both,
  Will accept the provision, nothing loth,
  --Will feast my love, then depart elsewhere,
  That my intellect may find its share.
  And ponder, O soul, the while thou departest,
  And see them applaud the great heart of the artist,
  Who, examining the capabilities
    Of the block of marble he has to fashion
    Into a type of thought or passion,--
  Not always, using obvious facilities,
  Shapes it, as any artist can,
  Into a perfect symmetrical man,
  Complete from head to foot of the life-size,
  Such as old Adam stood in his wife's eyes,--
  But, now and then, bravely aspires to consummate
  A Colossus by no means so easy to come at,
  And uses the whole of his block for the bust,
    Leaving the mind of the public to finish it,
  Since cut it ruefully short he must:
  On the face alone he expends his devotion,
    He rather would mar than resolve to diminish it,
  --Saying, "Applaud me for this grand notion
  "Of what a face may be! As for completing it
    "In breast and body and limbs, do that, you!"
  All hail! I fancy how, happily meeting it,
    A trunk and legs would perfect the statue,
  Could man carve so as to answer volition.
    And how much nobler than petty cavils,
    Were a hope to find, in my spirit-travels,
  Some artist of another ambition,
  Who, having a block to carve, no bigger,
  Has spent his power on the opposite quest,
    And believed to begin at the feet was best--
  For so may I see, ere I die, the whole figure!


  XIII

  No sooner said than out in the night!
  My heart lighter and more light:
  And still, as before, I was walking swift,
    With my senses settling fast and steadying,
  But my body caught up in the whirl and drift
    Of the vesture's amplitude, still eddying
  On just before me, still to be followed,
    As it carried me after with its motion,
  --What shall I say?--as a path, were hollowed,
    And a man went weltering through the ocean,
  Sucked along in the flying wake
  Of the luminous water-snake.


  XIV

  Alone! I am left alone once more--
    (Save for the garment's extreme fold
    Abandoned still to bless my hold)
  Alone, beside the entrance-door
  Of a sort of temple,-perhaps a college,
  --Like nothing I ever saw before
  At home in England, to my knowledge.
  The tall old quaint irregular town!
    It may be... though which, I can't affirm... any
    Of the famous middle-age towns of Germany:
  And this flight of stairs where I sit down,
  Is it Halle, Weimar, Cassel, Frankfort
  Or Gottingen, I have to thank for't?
  It may be Gottingen,--most likely.
  Through the open door I catch obliquely
  Glimpses of a lecture-hall;
    And not a bad assembly neither,
  Ranged decent and symmetrical
    On benches, waiting what's to see there:
  Which, holding still by the vesture's hem,
  I also resolve to see with them,
  Cautious this time how I suffer to slip
  The chance of joining in fellowship
  With any that call themselves his friends;
    As these folk do, I have a notion.
    But hist--a buzzing and emotion!
  All settle themselves, the while ascends
  By the creaking rail to the lecture-desk,
    Step by step, deliberate
    Because of his cranium's over-freight,
  Three parts sublime to one grotesque,
  If I have proved an accurate guesser,
  The hawk-nosed high-cheek-boned Professor.
  I felt at once as if there ran
  A shoot of love from my heart to the man--
  That sallow virgin-minded studious
    Martyr to mild enthusiasm,
  As he uttered a kind of cough-preludious
    That woke my sympathetic spasm,
  (Beside some spitting that made me sorry)
  And stood, surveying his auditory
  With a wan pure look, well-nigh celestial,--
    Those blue eyes had survived so much!
    While, under the foot they could not smutch,
  Lay all the fleshly and the bestial.
  Over he bowed, and arranged his notes,
  Till the auditory's clearing of throats
  Was done with, died into a silence;
    And, when each glance was upward sent,
    Each bearded mouth composed intent,
  And a pin might be heard drop half a mile hence,--
  He pushed back higher his spectacles,
  Let the eyes stream out like lamps from cells,
  And giving his head of hair--a hake
    Of undressed tow, for colour and quantity--
  One rapid and impatient shake,
    (As our own Young England adjusts a jaunty tie
  When about to impart, on mature digestion,
  Some thrilling view of the surplice-question)
  --The Professor's grave voice, sweet though hoarse,
  Broke into his Christmas-Eve discourse.


  XV

  And he began it by observing
    How reason dictated that men
  Should rectify the natural swerving,
    By a reversion, now and then,
  To the well-heads of knowledge, few
  And far away, whence rolling grew
  The life-stream wide whereat we drink,
  Commingled, as we needs must think,
  With waters alien to the source;
  To do which, aimed this eve's discourse;
  Since, where could be a fitter time
  For tracing backward to its prime
  This Christianity, this lake,
  This reservoir, whereat we slake,
  From one or other bank, our thirst?
  So, he proposed inquiring first
  Into the various sources whence
    This Myth of Christ is derivable;
  Demanding from the evidence,
    (Since plainly no such life was livable)
  How these phenomena should class?
  Whether 'twere best opine Christ was,
  Or never was at all, or whether
  He was and was not, both together--
  It matters little for the name,
  So the idea be left the same.
  Only, for practical purpose' sake,
  'Twas obviously as well to take
  The popular story,--understanding
    How the ineptitude of the time,
  And the penman's prejudice, expanding
    Fact into fable fit for the clime,
  Had, by slow and sure degrees, translated it
    Into this myth, this Individuum,--
  Which, when reason had strained and abated it
  Of foreign matter, left, for residuum,
  A Man!--a right true man, however,
  Whose work was worthy a man's endeavour:
  Work, that gave warrant almost sufficient
    To his disciples, for rather believing
  He was just omnipotent and omniscient,
    As it gives to us, for as frankly receiving
  His word, their tradition,--which, though it meant
  Something entirely different
  From all that those who only heard it,
  In their simplicity thought and averred it,
  Had yet a meaning quite as respectable:
  For, among other doctrines delectable,
  Was he not surely the first to insist on
    The natural sovereignty of our race?--
    Here the lecturer came to a pausing-place.
  And while his cough, like a drouthy piston,
  Tried to dislodge the husk that grew to him,
  I seized the occasion of bidding adieu to him,
  The vesture still within my hand.


  XVI

  I could interpret its command.
  This time he would not bid me enter
  The exhausted air-bell of the Critic.
  Truth's atmosphere may grow mephitic
  When Papist struggles with Dissenter,
  Impregnating its pristine clarity,
  --One, by his daily fare's vulgarity,
    Its gust of broken meat and garlic;
  --One, by his soul's too-much presuming
  To turn the frankincense's fuming
    And vapours of the candle starlike
  Into the cloud her wings she buoys on.
    Each, that thus sets the pure air seething,
    May poison it for healthy breathing--
  But the Critic leaves no air to poison;
  Pumps out with ruthless ingenuity
  Atom by atom, and leaves you--vacuity.
  Thus much of Christ does he reject?
  And what retain? His intellect?
  What is it I must reverence duly?
  Poor intellect for worship, truly,
  Which tells me simply what was told
    (If mere morality, bereft
    Of the God in Christ, be all that's left)
  Elsewhere by voices manifold;
  With this advantage, that the stater
    Made nowise the important stumble
    Of adding, he, the sage and humble,
  Was also one with the Creator.
  You urge Christ's followers' simplicity:
    But how does shifting blame, evade it?
  Have wisdom's words no more felicity?
    The stumbling-block, his speech--who laid it?
  How comes it that for one found able
  To sift the truth of it from fable,
  Millions believe it to the letter?
  Christ's goodness, then--does that fare better?
  Strange goodness, which upon the score
    Of being goodness, the mere due
  Of man to fellow-man, much more
    To God,--should take another view
  Of its possessor's privilege,
  And bid him rule his race! You pledge
  Your fealty to such rule? What, all--
  From heavenly John and Attic Paul,
  And that brave weather-battered Peter,
  Whose stout faith only stood completer
  For buffets, sinning to be pardoned,
  As, more his hands hauled nets, they hardened,--
  All, down to you, the man of men,
  Professing here at Gottingen,
  Compose Christ's flock! They, you and I,
  Are sheep of a good man! And why?
  The goodness,--how did he acquire it?
  Was it self-gained, did God inspire it?
  Choose which; then tell me, on what ground
  Should its possessor dare propound
  His claim to rise o'er us an inch?
    Were goodness all some man's invention,
    Who arbitrarily made mention
  What we should follow, and whence flinch,--
  What qualities might take the style
    Of right and wrong,--and had such guessing
    Met with as general acquiescing
  As graced the alphabet erewhile,
  When A got leave an Ox to be,
  No Camel (quoth the Jews) like G*,--
  *[Footnote: Gimel, the Hebrew G, means camel.]
  For thus inventing thing and title
  Worship were that man's fit requital.
  But if the common conscience must
  Be ultimately judge, adjust
  Its apt name to each quality
  Already known,--I would decree
  Worship for such mere demonstration
    And simple work of nomenclature,
    Only the day I praised, not nature,
  But Harvey, for the circulation.
  I would praise such a Christ, with pride
  And joy, that he, as none beside,
  Had taught us how to keep the mind
  God gave him, as God gave his kind,
  Freer than they from fleshly taint:
  I would call such a Christ our Saint,
  As I declare our Poet, him
  Whose insight makes all others dim:
  A thousand poets pried at life,
  And only one amid the strife
  Rose to be Shakespeare: each shall take
  His crown, I'd say, for the world's sake--
  Though some objected--"Had we seen
  "The heart and head of each, what screen
  "Was broken there to give them light,
  "While in ourselves it shuts the sight,
  "We should no more admire, perchance,
  "That these found truth out at a glance,
  "Than marvel how the bat discerns
  "Some pitch-dark cavern's fifty turns,
  "Led by a finer tact, a gift
  "He boasts, which other birds must shift
  "Without, and grope as best they can."
  No, freely I would praise the man,--
  Nor one whit more, if he contended
  That gift of his, from God descended.
  Ah friend, what gift of man's does not?
  No nearer something, by a jot,
  Rise an infinity of nothings
    Than one: take Euclid for your teacher:
  Distinguish kinds: do crownings, clothings,
    Make that creator which was creature?
  Multiply gifts upon man's head,
  And what, when all's done, shall be said
  But--the more gifted he, I ween!
    That one's made Christ, this other, Pilate,
  And this might be all that has been,--
    So what is there to frown or smile at?
  What is left for us, save, in growth
  Of soul, to rise up, far past both,
  From the gift looking to the giver,
  And from the cistern to the river,
  And from the finite to infinity,
  And from man's dust to God's divinity?


  XVII

  Take all in a word: the truth in God's breast
  Lies trace for trace upon curs impressed:
  Though he is so bright and we so dim,
  We are made in his image to witness him:
  And were no eye in us to tell,
    Instructed by no inner sense,
  The light of heaven from the dark of hell,
    That light would want its evidence,--
  Though justice, good and truth were still
  Divine, if, by some demon's will,
  Hatred and wrong had been proclaimed
  Law through the worlds, and right misnamed.
  No mere exposition of morality
  Made or in part or in totality,
  Should win you to give it worship, therefore:
  And, if no better proof you will care for,
  --Whom do you count the worst man upon earth?
    Be sure, he knows, in his conscience, more
  Of what right is, than arrives at birth
    In the best man's acts that we bow before:
  This last knows better--true, but my fact is,
  'Tis one thing to know, and another to practise.
  And thence I conclude that the real God-function
  Is to furnish a motive and injunction
  For practising what we know already.
  And such an injunction and such a motive
  As the God in Christ, do you waive, and "heady,
  "High-minded," hang your tablet-votive
  Outside the fane on a finger-post?
  Morality to the uttermost,
  Supreme in Christ as we all confess,
  Why need we prove would avail no jot
  To make him God, if God he were not?
  What is the point where himself lays stress?
  Does the precept run "Believe in good,
  "In justice, truth, now understood
  "For the first time?"--or, "Believe in me,
  "Who lived and died, yet essentially
  "Am Lord of Life?" Whoever can take
  The same to his heart and for mere love's sake
  Conceive of the love,--that man obtains
  A new truth; no conviction gains
  Of an old one only, made intense
  By a fresh appeal to his faded sense.


  XVIII

  Can it be that he stays inside?
    Is the vesture left me to commune with?
    Could my soul find aught to sing in tune with
  Even at this lecture, if she tried?
  Oh, let me at lowest sympathize
  With the lurking drop of blood that lies
  In the desiccated brain's white roots
  Without throb for Christ's attributes,
  As the lecturer makes his special boast!
  If love's dead there, it has left a ghost.
  Admire we, how from heart to brain
    (Though to say so strike the doctors dumb)
  One instinct rises and falls again,
    Restoring the equilibrium.
  And how when the Critic had done his best,
  And the pearl of price, at reason's test,
  Lay dust and ashes levigable
  On the Professor's lecture-table,--
  When we looked for the inference and monition
  That our faith, reduced to such condition,
  Be swept forthwith to its natural dust-hole,--
    He bids us, when we least expect it,
  Take back our faith,--if it be not just whole,
    Yet a pearl indeed, as his tests affect it,
  Which fact pays damage done rewardingly,
  So, prize we our dust and ashes accordingly!
  "Go home and venerate the myth
  "I thus have experimented with--
  "This man, continue to adore him
  "Rather than all who went before him,
  "And all who ever followed after!"--
    Surely for this I may praise you, my brother!
  Will you take the praise in tears or laughter?
    That's one point gained: can I compass another?
  Unlearned love was safe from spurning--
  Can't we respect your loveless learning?
  Let us at least give learning honour!
  What laurels had we showered upon her,
  Girding her loins up to perturb
  Our theory of the Middle Verb;
  Or Turk-like brandishing a scimitar
  O'er anapasts in comic-trimeter;
  Or curing the halt and maimed 'Iketides,'
  [Footnote: "The Suppliants," a fragment of a play by Aeschylus.]
  While we lounged on at our indebted ease:
  Instead of which, a tricksy demon
  Sets her at Titus or Philemon!
  When ignorance wags his ears of leather
  And hates God's word, 'tis altogether;
  Nor leaves he his congenial thistles
  To go and browse on Paul's Epistles.
  --And you, the audience, who might ravage
  The world wide, enviably savage,
  Nor heed the cry of the retriever,
  More than Herr Heine (before his fever),--
  I do not tell a lie so arrant
    As say my passion's wings are furled up,
  And, without plainest heavenly warrant,
    I were ready and glad to give the world up--
  But still, when you rub brow meticulous,
    And ponder the profit of turning holy
    If not for God's, for your own sake solely,
  --God forbid I should find you ridiculous!
  Deduce from this lecture all that eases you,
  Nay, call yourselves, if the calling pleases you,
  "Christians,"--abhor the deist's pravity,--
  Go on, you shall no more move my gravity
  Than, when I see boys ride a-cockhorse,
  I find it in my heart to embarrass them
  By hinting that their stick's a mock horse,
  And they really carry what they say carries them.


  XIX

  So sat I talking with my mind.
    I did not long to leave the door
    And find a new church, as before,
  But rather was quiet and inclined
  To prolong and enjoy the gentle resting
  From further tracking and trying and testing.
  "This tolerance is a genial mood!"
  (Said I, and a little pause ensued).
  "One trims the bark 'twixt shoal and shelf,
    "And sees, each side, the good effects of it,
  "A value for religion's self,
    "A carelessness about the sects of it.
  "Let me enjoy my own conviction,
    "Not watch my neighbour's faith with fretfulness,
  "Still spying there some dereliction
    "Of truth, perversity, forgetfulness!"
  Better a mild indifferentism,
    "Teaching that both our faiths (though duller
  "His shine through a dull spirit's prism)
    "Originally had one colour!
  "Better pursue a pilgrimage
    "Through ancient and through modern times
    "To many peoples, various climes,
  "Where I may see saint, savage, sage
  "Fuse their respective creeds in one
  "Before the general Father's throne!"


  XX

  --'Twas the horrible storm began afresh!
  The black night caught me in his mesh,
  Whirled me up, and flung me prone.
  I was left on the college-step alone.
  I looked, and far there, ever fleeting
  Far, far away, the receding gesture,
  And looming of the lessening vesture!--
  Swept forward from my stupid hand,
  While I watched my foolish heart expand
  In the lazy glow of benevolence,
    O'er the various modes of man's belief.
  I sprang up with fear's vehemence.
    Needs must there be one way, our chief
  Best way of worship: let me strive
  To find it, and when found, contrive
  My fellows also take their share!
  This constitutes my earthly care:
  God's is above it and distinct.
  For I, a man, with men am linked
  But not a brute with brutes; no gain
  That I experience, must remain
  Unshared: but should my best endeavour
  To share it, fail--subsisteth ever
  God's care above, and I exult
  That God, by God's own ways occult,
  May--doth, I will believe--bring back
  All wanderers to a single track.
  Meantime, I can but testify
  God's care for me--no more, can I--
  It is but for myself I know;
    The world rolls witnessing around me
    Only to leave me as it found me;
  Men cry there, but my ear is slow:
  There races flourish or decay
  --What boots it, while yon lucid way
  Loaded with stars divides the vault?
  But soon my soul repairs its fault
  When, sharpening sense's hebetude,
  She turns on my own life! So viewed,
  No mere mote's-breadth but teems immense
  With witnessings of providence:
  And woe to me if when I look
  Upon that record, the sole book
  Unsealed to me, I take no heed
  Of any warning that I read!
  Have I been sure, this Christmas-Eve,
  God's own hand did the rainbow weave,
  Whereby the truth from heaven slid
  Into my soul?--I cannot bid
  The world admit he stooped to heal
  My soul, as if in a thunder-peal
  Where one heard noise, and one saw flame,
  I only knew he named my name:
  But what is the world to me, for sorrow
  Or joy in its censure, when to-morrow
  It drops the remark, with just-turned head
  Then, on again, 'That man is dead'?
  Yes, but for me--my name called,--drawn
  As a conscript's lot from the lap's black yawn,
  He has dipt into on a battle-dawn:
  Bid out of life by a nod, a glance,--
  Stumbling, mute-mazed, at nature's chance,
  With a rapid finger circled round,
  Fixed to the first poor inch of ground
  To fight from, where his foot was found;
  Whose ear but a minute since lay free
  To the wide camp's buzz and gossipry--
  Summoned, a solitary man
  To end his life where his life began,
  From the safe glad rear, to the dreadful van!
  Soul of mine, hadst thou caught and held
  By the hem of the vesture!--


  XXI

                              And I caught
  At the flying robe, and unrepelled
    Was lapped again in its folds full-fraught
  With warmth and wonder and delight,
  God's mercy being infinite.
  For scarce had the words escaped my tongue,
  When, at a passionate bound, I sprung,
  Out of the wandering world of rain,
  Into the little chapel again.


  XXII

  How else was I found there, bolt upright
    On my bench, as if I had never left it?
  --Never flung out on the common at night,
    Nor met the storm and wedge-like cleft it,
  Seen the raree-show of Peter's successor,
  Or the laboratory of the Professor!
  For the Vision, that was true, I wist,
  True as that heaven and earth exist.
  There sat my friend, the yellow and tall,
  With his neck and its wen in the selfsame place;
  Yet my nearest neighbour's cheek showed gall.
    She had slid away a contemptuous space:
  And the old fat woman, late so placable,
  Eyed me with symptoms hardly mistakable,
  Of her milk of kindness turning rancid.
  In short, a spectator might have fancied
  That I had nodded, betrayed by slumber.
  Yet kept my scat, a warning ghastly,
  Through the heads of the sermon, nine in number,
  And woke up now at the tenth and lastly.
  But again, could such disgrace have happened?
    Each friend at my elbow had surely nudged it;
  And, as for the sermon, where did my nap end?
    Unless I heard it, could I have judged it?
  Could I report as I do at the close,
  First, the preacher speaks through his nose:
  Second, his gesture is too emphatic:
    Thirdly, to waive what's pedagogic,
    The subject-matter itself lacks logic:
  Fourthly, the English is ungrammatic.
  Great news! the preacher is found no Pascal,
  Whom, if I pleased, I might to the task call
  Of making square to a finite eye
  The circle of infinity,
  And find so all-but-just-succeeding!
  Great news! the sermon proves no reading
  Where bee-like in the flowers I bury me,
  Like Taylor's the immortal Jeremy!
  And now that I know the very worst of him,
  What was it I thought to obtain at first of him?
  Ha! Is God mocked, as he asks,
  Shall I take on me to change his tasks,
  And dare, despatched to a river-head
    For a simple draught of the element,
    Neglect the thing for which he sent,
  And return with another thing instead?--
  Saying, "Because the water found
  "Welling up from the underground,
  "Is mingled with the taints of earth,
  "While thou, I know, dost laugh at dearth,
  "And couldst, at wink or word, convulse
  "The world with the leap of a river-pulse,--
  "Therefore I turned from the oozings muddy,
    "And bring thee a chalice I found, instead;
  "See the brave veins in the breccia ruddy!
    "One would suppose that the marble bled.
  "What matters the water? A hope I have nursed:
    "The waterless cup will quench my thirst."
  --Better have knelt at the poorest stream
  That trickles in pain from the straitest rift!
  For the less or the more is all God's gift,
  Who blocks up or breaks wide the granite-seam.
  And here, is there water or not, to drink?
  I then, in ignorance and weakness,
  Taking God's help, have attained to think
  My heart does best to receive in meekness
  That mode of worship, as most to his mind,
  Where earthly aids being cast behind,
  His All in All appears serene
  With the thinnest human veil between,
  Letting the mystic lamps, the seven,
  The many motions of his spirit,
  Pass, as they list, to earth from heaven.
  For the preacher's merit or demerit,
  It were to be wished the flaws were fewer
  In the earthen vessel, holding treasure
  Which lies as safe in a golden ewer;
    But the main thing is, does it hold good measure?
  Heaven soon sets right all other matters!--
    Ask, else, these ruins of humanity,
  This flesh worn out to rags and tatters,
    This soul at struggle with insanity,
  Who thence take comfort--can I doubt?--
  Which an empire gained were a loss without.
  May it be mine! And let us hope
  That no worse blessing befall the Pope,
  Turned sick at last of to-day's buffoonery,
    Of posturings and petticoatings,
    Beside his Bourbon bully's gloatings
  In the bloody orgies of drunk poltroonery!
  Nor may the Professor forego its peace
    At Gottingen presently, when, in the dusk
  Of his life, if his cough, as I fear, should increase,
    Prophesied of by that horrible husk--
  When thicker and thicker the darkness fills
  The world through his misty spectacles,
  And he gropes for something more substantial
    Than a fable, myth or personification,--
  May Christ do for him what no mere man shall,
    And stand confessed as the God of salvation!
  Meantime, in the still recurring fear
    Lest myself, at unawares, be found,
    While attacking the choice of my neighbours round,
  With none of my own made--I choose here!
  The giving out of the hymn reclaims me;
  I have done: and if any blames me,
  Thinking that merely to touch in brevity
    The topics I dwell on, were unlawful,--
  Or worse, that I trench, with undue levity,
    On the bounds of the holy and the awful,--
  I praise the heart, and pity the head of him,
  And refer myself to THEE, instead of him,
  Who head and heart alike discernest
    Looking below light speech we utter,
    When frothy spume and frequent sputter
  Prove that the soul's depths boil in earnest!
  May truth shine out, stand ever before us!
  I put up pencil and join chorus
  To Hepzibah Tune, without further apology,
    The last five verses of the third section
    Of the seventeenth hymn of Whitfield's Collection,
  To conclude with the doxology.











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Christmas Eve, by Robert Browning

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHRISTMAS EVE ***

***** This file should be named 6670.txt or 6670.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/6/7/6670/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team. HTML version by Al
Haines.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
