Project Gutenberg's Mrs. Budlong's Christmas Presents, by Rupert Hughes

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Mrs. Budlong's Christmas Presents

Author: Rupert Hughes

Release Date: July 11, 2004 [EBook #12881]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MRS. BUDLONG'S CHRISTMAS PRESENTS ***




Produced by Al Haines




MRS. BUDLONG'S CHRISTMAS PRESENTS

BY

RUPERT HUGHES




AUTHOR OF "EXCUSE ME," "THE OLD NEST," ETC.




MCMXII




CONTENTS

CHAPTER

    I  AT THE SIGN OF THE PIANO LAMP
   II  CHRONICLES OF A CRAFTSMAN
  III  MISTRESS OF THE REVELS
   IV  ONLY A MILLIONAIRE
    V  THE BITER BIT
   VI  DESPAIR AND AN IDEA
  VII  FOILED
 VIII  FOILED AGAIN
   IX  WORSE, AND MORE OF IT
    X  A WELL LAID PLAN
   XI  GANG AGLEY AGAIN
  XII  AN AMAZING CHRISTMAS




MRS. BUDLONG'S CHRISTMAS PRESENTS

I

AT THE SIGN OF THE PIANO LAMP

The morning after Christmas Eve is the worst morning-after there is.
The very house suffers the headache that follows a prolonged spree.
Remorse stalks at large; remorse for the things one gave--and did not
give--and got.

Everybody must act a general glee which can be felt only
specifically, if at all.  Everybody must exclaim about everything Oh!
and Ah! and How Sweet of You! and Isn't it Perfectly Dear! The very
THING I Wanted! and How DID you EVER Guess it?

Christmas morning in the town of Carthage is a day when most of the
people keep close at home, for Christmas is another passover.  It is
Santa Claus that passes over.

People in Carthage are not rich; the shops are not grandiose, and
inter-family presents are apt to be trivial and futile--or worse yet,
utile.

The Carthaginian mother generally finds that Father has credited the
hat she got last fall, to this Christmas; the elder brothers receive
warm under-things and the young ones brass-toed boots, mitts and
mufflers.  The girls may find something ornamental in their
stockings, and their stockings may be silk or nearly--but then girls
have to be foolishly diked up anyway, or they will never be married
out.  Dressing up daughters comes under the head of window-display or
coupons, and is charged off to publicity.

Nearly everybody in Carthage--except Mrs. Ulysses S. G.
Budlong--celebrates Christmas behind closed doors.  People find it
easier to rhapsodize when the collateral is not shown.  It is amazing
how far a Carthaginian can go on the most meager donation.  The
formula is usually: "We had Such a lovely Christmas at our house.
What did I get?  Oh, so many things I can't reMember!"

But Mrs. Ulysses S. G. Budlong does not celebrate her Christmasses
behind closed doors--or rather she did not: a strange change came
over her this last Christmas.  She used to open her doors
wide--metaphorically, that is; for there was a storm-door with a
spring on it to keep the cold draught out of the hall.

As regular as Christmas itself was the oh-quite-informal reception
Mrs. Budlong gave to mitigate the ineffable stupidity of Christmas
afternoon: that dolorous period when one meditates the ancient
platitude that anticipation is better than realization; and suddenly
understands why it is blesseder to give than to receive: because one
does not have to wear what one gives away.

On Christmas Mrs. U. S. G. Budlong took all the gifts she had
gleaned, and piled them on and around the baby grand piano in the
back parlor.  There was a piano lamp there, one of those illuminated
umbrellas--about as large and as useful as a date-palm tree.

Along about that time in the afternoon when the Christmas dinner
becomes a matter of hopeless remorse, Mrs. Budlong's neighbors were
expected to drop in and view the loot under the lamp.  It looked like
hospitality, but it felt like hostility.  She passed her neighbors
under the yoke and gloated over her guests, while seeming to
overgloat her gifts.

But she got the gifts.  There was no question of that.  By hook or by
crook she saw to it that the bazaar under the piano lamp always
groaned.

One of the chief engines for keeping up the display was the display
itself.  Everybody who knew Mrs. Budlong--and not to know Mrs.
Budlong was to argue oneself unknown--knew that he or she would be
invited to this Christmas triumph.  And being invited rather implied
being represented in the tribute.

Hence ensued a curious rivalry in Carthage.  People vied with each
other in giving Mrs. Budlong presents; not that they loved Mrs.
Budlong more, but that they loved comparisons less.

The rivalry had grown to ridiculous proportions.  But of course Mrs.
Budlong did not care how ridiculous it grew; for it could hardly have
escaped her shrewd eyes how largely it advantaged her that people
should give her presents in order to show other people that some
people needn't think they could show off before other people without
having other people show that they could show off, too, as well as
other people could.  The pyschology must be correct, for it is
incoherent.

Mrs. Budlong herself was never known to break any of the
commandments, but in her back parlor her neighbors made flitters of
the one against coveting thy neighbor's and-so-forth and so-on.

It was when Mr. and Mrs. County Road Supervisor Detwiller were
walking home from one of these occasions, that Mr. Detwiller was
saying: "Well, ain't Mizzes Budlong the niftiest little gift-getter
that ever held up a train?  How on earth did We happen to get stung?"

"I don't know, Roscoe.  It's one of those things you can't get out of
without getting out of town too.  Here we've been and gone and
skimped our own children to buy something that would show up good in
Mrs. Budlong's back parlor, and when I laid eyes on it in all that
clutter--why, if it didn't look like something the cat brought in,
I'll eat it!"

Mr. Detwiller had only one consolation--and he grinned over it:

"Well, there's no use cryin' over spilt gifts.  But did you see how
she stuck old Widower Clute for that Japanese porcelain vace--I
notice she called it vahs?"

"Porcelain?" sniffed Mrs. Detwiller.  "Paper musshay!"

"Well, getting even a paper--what you said--from old Clute is equal
to extracting solid gold from anybody else.  He's the stingiest man
in sev'n states.  He don't care any more for a two dollar bill than
he does for his right eye.  I bet she gave him ether before he let
go."

"Oh, she works all the old bachelors and widowers that way," said
Mrs. Detwiller, with a mixture of contempt and awe.  "Invites 'em to
a dinner party or two around Christmas marketing time, and begins to
talk about how pretty the shops are and how tempting everything she
wants is; says she saw a nimitation bronze clock at Strouther and
Streckfuss's that it almost broke her heart to leave there.  But o'
course she couldn't afford to buy those kind of things for herself
now when she's got to remember all her dear friends, and she runs on
and on and the old batch growls, 'Stung again!' and goes to Strouther
and Streckfuss's and tells Mr. Streckfuss to send Mrs. Budlong that
blamed bronze clock she was admiring.  And that's how she gets
things.  I could do it myself if I'd a mind to."

Mr. Detwiller felt that there was more envy than truth in this last
remark, and he was rash enough to speak up for justice: "You could if
you'd a mind to?  Yep.  If you'd a mind to!  That's what somebody
said about Shakespeare's plays.  'I could a wrote 'em myself if I'd a
mind to,' says he, and somebody else said, 'Yes, if you'd a mind to,'
he says.  And that's about it.  Any body could do what Mizzes Budlong
does if they had the mind to; but the thing is, she's got the mind
to.  She goes after the gifts--and gits 'em.  She don't almost git
'em, and she ain't goin' to git 'em.  She gits 'em.  And what gits me
is how she gits 'em."

"Roscoe Detwiller, if you're goin' to praise that woman in the
presence of your own lawful wife, I'll never speak to you the longest
day I live." "Who's praisin' her?  I was just sayin'--"

"Why, Roscoe Detwiller, you did, too!  And I should think you'd be
ashamed of yourself."

"Say, what ails you?  Why, I was roastin' her to beat the band."

"And to think that on Christmas day of all days I should live to hear
my own husband that I've loved and cherished and worked my fingers to
the bone and never got any thanks and other women keepin' two and
three hired girls, and after him denyin' his own children things to
get expensive presents for a shameless creature like that Budlong
woman--"

All over Carthage on Christmas afternoons couples were similarly at
loggerheads over Mrs. Budlong's annual triumph.

Now of course Mrs. Budlong did not get all those presents without
giving presents.  Not in Carthage!  It might have been possible to
bamboozle these people one Christmas, but never another.  Mrs.
Budlong gave heaps of presents.  Christmas was an industry with her,
an ambition; Christmas was her career.  It had long ago lost its
religious significance for her, as for nearly everybody else in
Carthage.  Even Mr. Frankenstein (the Pantatorium magnate) is one of
the most ardent advertisers of Christmas bargains, while Isidore
Strouther and Esau Streckfuss are "almost persuaded" every December.
They might be entirely persuaded if it were not for the scenes they
witness in their aisles during the last weeks of Yuletide and the
aftermath of trying to collect from the Gentile husbands during
Billtide.

Mrs.  Budlong's Christmas presents were of two sorts: those she made
herself and those she made her husband pay for.  He was the typical
husband who never fails to settle his wife's bills, so long as he may
raise a row about them till his wife cries and looks like an
expensive luxury which only a really successful man could afford.
Then he subsides until the first of the next month.




II

CHRONICLES OF A CRAFTSMAN

Mrs. Budlong's campaign was undertaken with the same farsightedness
as a magazine editor's.  On or about the Fourth of July she began to
worry and plan.  By the second week in August she had her tatting
well under way.  By the middle of September she was getting in her
embroidered doilies.  The earliest frost rarely surprised her with
her quilts untufted.  And when the first snow flew, her sachet bags
were all stuffed and smelly.

She was very feminine in her sense of the value of her own time.  At
missionary meetings she would shed tears over the pathetic pictures
of Oriental women who spent a year weaving a rug which would sell for
a paltry hundred dollars and last a mere century or two.  Then she
would cheerfully devote fifteen days of incessant stitching at
something she carried round in a sort of drumhead.  At the end of
that time she would have completed a more or less intolerable piece
of colored fabric which she called a "drape" or a "throw."  It could
not be duplicated at a shop for less than $1.75, and it would wash
perhaps three times.

Mr. Budlong once figured that if sweat-shop proprietors paid wages at
the scale Mrs. Budlong established for herself, all the seamstresses
and seamsters would curl up round their machines and die of
starvation the first week.  But he never told Mrs. Budlong this.
Fancy stitching did not earn much, but it did not cost much; and it
kept her mysteriously contented.  She was stitching herself to her
own home all the time.

The Christmas presents Mrs. Budlong made herself were not all a
matter of needle and thread.  Not at all!  One year she turned her
sewing room into a smithy.  She gave Mr. and Mrs. Doctor Tisnower the
loveliest hand-hammered brass coal scuttle that ever was seen--and
with a purple ribbon tied to its tail.  They kept flowers in it
several summers, till one cruel winter a new servant put coal in it
and completely scuttled it.

The same year she gave Mrs. ex-Mayor Cinnamon a hammered brass
version of a C. D. Gibson drawing.  The lady and gentleman looked as
if they had broken out with a combination of yellow fever and
smallpox, or suffered from enlarged pores or something.  And the
plum-colored plush frame didn't sit very well on the vermilion wall
paper.  But Mrs. Cinnamon hung it over the sofa in the expectation of
changing the paper some day.  It stayed there until the fateful
evening when Mr. Nelson Chur called on Miss Editha Cinnamon and was
just warming up a proposal that had held over almost as long as the
wall paper, when bang! down came the overhanging brass drawing and
bent itself hopelessly on Mr. Chur's skull.  Mr. Chur said something
that may have been Damocles.  But he did not propose, and Mrs.
Budlong was weeks wondering why Mrs. Cinnamon was so snippy to her.

The hammered brass era gave way to the opposite extreme of painted
velvet.  They say it is a difficult art; and it may well be.  Mrs.
Budlong's first landscape might as well have been painted on the side
of her Scotch collie.

Her most finished roses had something of the look of shaggy
tarantulas that had fallen into a paint pot and emerged in a towering
rage.  It was in that velvetolene stratum that she painted for the
church a tasseled pulpit cloth that hung down a yard below the Bible.
Dr. Torpadie was a very soothing preacher, but no one slept o'sermons
during the reign of that pulpit cloth.

Mrs. Budlong was so elated over the success of it, however, that she
announced her intention of going in for stained glass.  She planned a
series of the sweetest windows to replace those already in the
church.  But she never got nearer to that than painted china.

The painted china era was a dire era.  The cups would break and the
colors would run, and they never came out what she expected after
they were fired.  Of course she knew that the pigments must suffer
alteration in the furnace, but there was always a surprise beyond
surprise.

She soon became accustomed to getting green roses with crimson
leaves, and deep blue apple blossoms against a pure white sky, but
when she finished one complete set of table china in fifty pieces,
each cup and saucer with a flower on it, the result looked so
startlingly like something from a medical museum, that she never
dared give the set away.  She lent it to the cook to eat her meals
on.  The set went fast.

During this epoch Master Ulysses Budlong Jr. was studying at school a
physiology ornamented with a few pictures in color representing the
stomachs of alcohol specialists.  They were intended, perhaps, to
frighten little school children from frequenting saloons during
recess, or to warn them not to put whisky on their porridge.

It was at this time that Mrs. Budlong spent two weeks' hard labor
painting Easter lilies on an umbrella jug.  When it came home from
the furnace, her husband stared at it and mumbled:

"It's artistic, but what is it?"

Little Ulysses shrieked: "Oh, I know!" and darting away, returned
with his physiology opened at one of those gastric sunsets,
and--well, it was this that impelled Mrs. Budlong to a solemn pledge
never to paint china again--a pledge she has nobly kept.

From smeared china she went to that art in which a woman buys
something at a store, pulls out half of it, and calls the remnant
drawn work.  A season of this was succeeded by a mania for sofa
cushions.  It fairly snowed sofa cushions all over Carthage that
Christmas; and Yale, Harvard and Princeton pillows could be found in
homes that had never known even a night school alumnus.

There ensued a sober period of burnt wood and a period of burnt
leather, during which excited neighbors with a keen sense of smell
called the fire department three times and the board of health once.
And now Indian heads broke out all over town and the walls looked as
if a shoemaker's apron had been chosen for the national pennant.

There were various other spasms of manufacture, each of them
fashionable at its time and foolish at anytime.  As Mr. Detwiller
said:

"Somebody ought to write a history of Mrs. Budlong's Christmas
presents.  It would tell the complete story of all the darned fool
fads that American women have been up to for twenty years."

But foolish soever, Mrs. Budlong was fair.  A keen sense of
sportsmanship led her to give full notice to such people as she
planned to honor with her gifts.  She knew how embarrassing it is to
receive presents from one to whom no present has been sent, and she
made it a point of honor somehow to forewarn her prospective
beneficiaries betimes.  Her favorite method was the classic device of
pretending to let slip a secret.  For instance:

"Yesterday morning, my dear, I had the Strangest exPerience.  It was
just ten o'clock.  I remember the hour so exactly because for the
last few days I have made it a rule to begin work on your Christmas
present just at ten--Oh, but I didn't mean to tell you.  It was to be
a surprise.  No, don't ask me, I won't give you an inkling, but I
really think it will please you.  It's something you've been needing
for Such a long time."

And she left the victim to writhe from then on to Christmas, trying
alternately to imagine what gift was impending and what would be an
appropriate counter-gift.




III

MISTRESS OF THE REVELS

In more ways than one Mrs. Budlong kept Carthage on the writhe.
Christmas was merely the climax of a ceaseless activity.  All the
year round she was at work like a yeast alert in a soggy dough.

She was forever getting up things.  She was one of those terrible
women who return calls on time or a little ahead.  That made it
necessary for you to return hers earlier.  If you didn't, she called
you up on the telephone and asked you why you hadn't.  You had to
promise to come over at once or she'd talk to you till your ear was
welded to the telephone.  Then if you broke your promise she called
you up about that.  She got in from fifty-two to a hundred and four
calls a year, where one or two would have amply sufficed for all she
had to say.

It was due to her that Carthage had such a lively social
existence--for its size.  Once, when she fell ill, the people felt
suddenly as passengers feel when a street car is suddenly braked back
on its haunches.  All Carthage found itself wavering and poised on
tiptoe and clinging to straps; and then it sogged back on its heels
and waited till the car should resume progress.  Mrs. Budlong was the
town's motorman--or "motorneer," as they say in Carthage.

Before she was out of bed, she had invitations abroad for a
convalescent tea, and everybody said, "Here we go again!"

If strangers visited Carthage, Mrs. Budlong counted them her clients
the moment they arrived.  Of course, the merely commercial visitors
she left to the hackmen at the station, but friends or relatives of
prominent people could not escape Mrs. Budlong's well-meant
attentions.  It was sometimes embarrassing when relatives
appeared--for everybody has Concealed Relatives that he is perfectly
willing to leave in concealment.

Mrs. Alex. (pronounced Ellick) Stubblebine never forgave Mrs. Budlong
for dragging into the limelight some obscure cousins of her husband's
who had drifted into Carthage to borrow money on their farm.  Mrs.
Stubblebine was always bragging about her people, her own people that
is.  Her husband's people, of course, were after all only
Stubblebines, while her maiden name was Dilatush; and the Dilatushes,
as everybody knew, were related by marriage to the Tatums.

But these were Stubblebines that came to town.  Mrs. Stubblebine
could hardly slam the door in their faces, but she would fain have
locked the doors after them.  She would not even invite them out on
the front porch.  She told them the back porch was cosier and less
conspicuous.  And then Mrs. Budlong had to call up on the telephone
and sing out in her telephoniest tone:

"Oh, my dear, I've just this minute heard you have guests--some of
your dear husband's relatives.  Now they must come to me to dinner
to-morrow.  Oh, it isn't the slightest trouble, I asSure you.  I'm
giving a little party anyway.  I won't take no for an answer."

And she wouldn't.  Mrs. Stubblebine fairly perspired excuses, but
Mrs. Budlong finally grew so suspicious that she had to accept; or
leave the impression that the relatives were burglars or
counterfeiters in hiding.  And they were not--they were pitifully
honest.

The result was even worse than she feared.  Mr. Stubblebine's cousin
was so shy that he never said a word except when it was pulled out of
him, and then he said, "Yes, ma'am"!

In Carthage when you are at a dinner party and you don't quite catch
the last remark, you don't snap "What?" or "How?" or "Wha' jew say?"
Whatever your home habits may be, at a dinner party or before
comp'ny, you raise your eyebrows gracefully and murmur, "I beg your
pardon."

But Mr. Stubblebine's rural cousin grunted "Huh?"--like an Indian
chief trying to scare a white general.  And he was perfectly frank
about the intimate processes of mastication.

And when he dropped a batch of scalloped oysters into his watch
pocket he solemnly fished them-out with a souvenir after-dinner
coffee spoon having the Statue of Liberty for a handle and Brooklyn
Bridge in the bowl.

And the wretch's wife was so nervous that she talked all the time
about people the others had never seen or heard of.  And she said she
"never used tomattus."  And she wasn't ashamed of what she was
chewing either.

Mrs. Stubblebine would have felt much obliged to fate if she had been
presented with an apoplectic stroke.  But she had to sit the dinner
out.  From what she said to her poor husband afterward, however, one
might have gathered that he picked out those relatives just to spite
her, when as a matter of fact he had always loathed them and
regretted them and the next day he borrowed enough money to lend them
and send them back to the soil.

Mrs. Budlong had constituted herself Entertainment Committee for all
sorts of visitors.  If a young girl came home from boarding school
with a classmate, the real hostess had hardly time to show her to the
spare room, and say, "This is the bathroom, round here; watch out for
the step.  And if the water don't run just wait--" when the telephone
would go Brrrrr!  And there would be Mrs. Budlong brandishing an
invitation to a dinner party.

When the supply of guests ran low she would visit the sick.  If a
worn-out housewife slept late some morning to catch up, Mrs. Budlong
would hear of it and rush over with a broth or something.  It is said
that old Miss Malkin got out of bed with an unfinished attack of
pneumonia, just to keep from eating any more of Mrs. Budlong's wine
jellies.

In Carthage one pays for the telephone by the year.  The company lost
money on Mrs. Budlong's wire.  As a telephoner she was simply
interminable.  She would spend a weekend at the instrument while the
prisoner at the other extreme of the wire shifted from ear to ear,
sagged along the wall, postponed household duties, made signals of
distress to other members of the family, and generally cursed Mr.
Alexander Graham Bell for his ingenuity.

Three wall telephones were changed to table phones on Mrs. Budlong's
account, and Mrs. Talbot had hers put by the bed.  She used to take
naps while Mrs. Budlong talked and she trained herself to murmur,
"Yes, dear," at intervals in her sleep.

By means like this Mrs. Budlong kept Carthage more or less under her
thumb.  Carthage squirmed but it could not crawl out from under.

This is the story of how the thumb was removed for good and all.  It
was Mrs. Budlong herself that removed it.  Carthage could never have
pried it up.

And strange to say the thumb came off because it grew popular.

Hitherto Mrs. Budlong had never been truly popular.  People were
merely afraid of her.  She was a whipper-in, a social bush-beater,
driving the populace from cover like partridges.  She would not let
the town rest.  The merchants alone admired her, for she was the
cause of much buying of new shoes, new hats, new clothes, fine
groceries, olives, Malaga grapes, salted almonds, raisins, English
walnuts and other things that one eats only at parties.  She was the
first woman in Carthage that ever gave a luncheon and called it
breakfast, as years before she had been the first hostess to give a
dinner at any time except in the middle of the day.  Also, she was
the first person there to say, "Come to me" when she meant "Come to
our house."  It had a Scriptural sound and was thought shocking until
Carthage grew used to it.

It was due to her that several elderly men were forced into their
first evening dress.  They had thought to escape through life without
that ordeal.  Old Clute would have preferred to be fitted for a pine
box, and would have felt about as comfortable in it.  He tried to
compromise with the tailor on a garment that could serve as a Prince
Albert by day and a "swaller tail" by night, but Mr. Kweskin could
not manage it even though his Christian name was Moses.

So Mr. Clute blamed Mrs. Budlong for yet another expense.  Husbands
all over town were blaming Mrs. Budlong for running their families
into fool extravagances.  Mothers were blaming her for dragging them
round by the nose and leaving them no rest.  But everybody in town
resentfully obeyed Mrs. Budlong, though Mrs. Roscoe Detwiller wanted
to organize a HomeKeepers Union, and strike.  For the women never
dared trust themselves about the house in a wrapper, since Mrs.
Budlong might happen in as like as not--rather liker than not.

And then, just as the town was fermenting for revolt, Mrs. Budlong
came into a lot of money.




IV

ONLY A MILLIONAIRE

That is, Mr. Budlong came into a lot of money.  Which meant that Mr.
Budlong would be permitted to take care of it while his wife got rid of
it.  One of those relatives, very common in fiction, and not altogether
unknown in real life, finally let go of her money at the behest of her
impatient undertaker.  The Budlongs had the pleasure of seeing the
glorious news of their good fortune in big headlines in the Carthage
papers.

It was the only display Mr. Budlong ever received in that paper without
paying for it--excepting the time when he ran for Mayor on the
opposition ticket and was referred to in letters an inch high as
"Candidate Nipped-in-the-Budlong."

But now the cornucopia of plenty had burst wide open on the front
porch.  It seemed as if they would have to wade through gold dollars to
get to their front gate--when the money was collected.  When the money
was collected.

And now it was Mrs.  Budlong's telephone that rang and rang.  It was
she that was called up and called up.  It was she that sagged along the
wall and shifted from foot to foot, from elbow to elbow and ear to ear.

After living in Carthage all her life she was suddenly, as it were,
welcomed to the city as a distinguished visiting stranger.  And now she
had no need to invite people to return their calls.  They came
spontaneously.  Sometimes there were a dozen calling at once.  It was a
reception every day.  There were overflow meetings in the room which
Mrs. Budlong called Mr. Budlong's "den." This was the place where she
kept the furniture that she didn't dare keep in the parlor.

People who had never come to see her in spite of her prehensile
telephone, dropped in to pay up some musty old call that had lain
unreturned for years.  People who had always come formally, even
funereally, rushed in as informally and with as devouring an enthusiasm
as old chums.  People who used to run in informally now drove up in
vehicles from MacMulkin's livery stable; or if they came in their own
turn-outs they had the tops washed and the harness polished, and the
gardener and furnaceman who drove, had his hat brushed, was not allowed
to smoke, and was urged to sit up straight and for heaven's sake to
keep his foot off the dashboard.

People who had been in the habit of devoting a day or two to cleaning
up a year's social debts and went up and down the streets dropping
doleful calls like wreaths on headstones, walked in unannounced of
mornings.  It was now Mrs. Budlong that had to keep dressed up all day.
Everybody accepted the inevitable invitations to have a cup of tea,
till the cook struck.  Cook said she had conthracted to cuke for a
small family, not to run a continurous bairbecue.  Besides she had to
answer the doorbell so much she couldn't get her hands into the dough,
before they were out again.  And dinner was never ready.  The amount of
tea consumed and bakery cake and the butter, began to alarm Mrs.
Budlong.  And Carthage people were so nervous at taking tea with a
millionairess that they kept dropping cups or setting saucers down too
hard.

Mrs. Budlong had never a moment the whole day long to leave the house,
and she suddenly found herself without a call returned.  She had so
many invitations to dinners and luncheons, that her life became a hop,
skip and jump.

During the first ecstasy of the good news, Mrs. Budlong had raved over
the places she was going to travel,--Paris (now pronounced Paree),
London, Vienna, St. Marks, the Lion of Lucerne--she talked like a
handbook of Cook's Tours.  To successive callers she told the story
over and over till the rhapsody finally palled on her own tongue.  She
began to hate Paree, London, Vienna, St. Marks, and to loathe the Lion
of Lucerne.  All she wanted to do was to get out of town to some quiet
retreat.  Carthage was no longer quiet.  It simmered to the
boiling-over point.

Once it had been Mrs. Budlong's pride to be the social leader of
Carthage.  Now that her husband was worth (or to be worth) a hundred
thousand dollars Carthage seemed a very petty parish to be the social
leader of.  She began to read New York society notes with expectancy,
as one cons the Baedeker of a town one is approaching.

She lay awake nights wondering what she should wear at Mrs. Stuyvesant
Square's next party and at Mrs. Astor House's sociable.  She fretted
the choice whether she should take a letter from her church to St.
Bartholomew's or to Grace or St. John's the Divine's.  And all the
while she was pouring tea for the wives of harness makers and
druggists, dentists and grocers.

The more reason for not appearing before them in the same clothes
incessantly.  But with a dinner or a reception or a tea or a ball every
night, her two dressy-up dresses became so familiar that at one party
when she was coming downstairs from laying off her cloak people spoke
to her dress before they could see her face.  And she could hardly
afford to get new clothes, for after all she had not come into the
money.  She had just come at it, or toward it; or as her husband began
to say, tip against it.

Mr. Budlong was kept on such tenterhooks by lawyers and papers to sign,
titles to clear, executors and executrices to consult, and waivers,
deeds, indentures and things that he had no time for his regular
business.

As there is housemaid's knee, and painter's colic, so there is
millionaire's melancholia.  And the Budlongs were enduring the illness
without entertaining the microbe.

It is almost as much trouble to inherit money nowadays as to earn it in
the first place.  Mr. Budlong was confronted with such a list of
post-mortem debts that must be postpaid for his deceased Aunt Ida that
he almost begrudged her her bit of very real estate in Woodlawn.  And
the Budlongs began to think that tombstones were in bad form if
ostentatious.  Heirs have notoriously simple tastes in monuments.

They had always accounted Aunt Ida a hard-fisted miser before, but now
she began to look like a slippery-palmed spendthrift.  They began
almost to suspect the probity of the poor old maid.  Worse yet, they
feared that a later will might turn up bequeathing all her money to
some abominable charity or other.  She had been addicted to occasional
subscriptions during her lifetime.

The Budlongs themselves were beginning, even at this distance from
their money-to-be, to suffer its infection, its inevitable reaction on
the character.  Those who live beyond their means joyously when their
means are small, become small themselves, when their means get beyond
living beyond.  The Budlongs began to figure percentages on sums left
in the bank or put out on mortgages.  They began to think money; and
money is money, large or small.  Mrs. Budlong began to feel that she
had been unjust to Aunt Ida.  What she had called miserliness was
really prudence and thrift and other pleasant-sounding virtues.  What
she had called liberality was wanton waste.

Finally her social debts reached such a mass that she decided to give a
large dinner to wipe off a great number at once.  But now when she
calculated that the olives, the turkey, the Malaga grapes, the English
walnuts, the salted almonds and a man from the hotel to wait on table,
would total up twenty-five dollars or so, she found herself figuring
how much twenty-five dollars would amount to in twenty-five years at
compound interest.

She grew frantic to be quit of Carthage--to rub it off her visiting
list.  Unconsciously her motto became Cato's ruthless _Carthago delenda
est_.

But she could neither delete Carthage from her map, nor free her feet
from its dust.  Her husband's business required him yet awhile.  Even
to close it up took time.  And he would not, and could not, borrow
money on Aunt Ida's estate till he was sure that it was his.

But all the while the festival reveled on.  People in Carthage to whom
New York was an inaccessible Carcassone, were now planning to visit
Mrs. Budlong there at the palatial home she had described.  Some of
them frankly told her they were coming to see her.  Wealth took on a
new discomfort.

Sally Swezey afflicted the telephone with gossip: "As Mrs. Talbot was
saying only yes'day, my dear, so many folks have threatened to visit
you in your home on Fifth Avenue that you'll have to hang hammocks in
your front yard."

And now they had spoiled even her future for her.  What pride could she
take in having a gorgeous home on Fifth Avenue with all these Carthage
people rocking on the front porch.  Probably some warm evening when
Mrs. Hotel Vanderbilt was driving by in her new barouche, it would be
just like Roscoe Detwiller to turn in at the gate, flounce down on the
top step and sit there with his vest unbuttoned, and his seersucker
coat under his arm, while he mopped the inside of his hat with his
handkerchief.

But that was the discomfort of the morrow.  To-day had its own spawn.
One morning she was called to the telephone by the merciless Sallie
Swezey with a new infliction.  There was something almost ghoulish in
Mrs. Swezey's cackling glee as she sang out across the wire:

"We're all so glad, my dear, that the next meeting of the Progressive
Euchre is to be at your house."

Mrs. Budlong's chin dropped.  She had quite forgotten this.  Sallie
chortled on:

"And say, do you know what?"

"What?"

"Everybody says you're going to give solid gold prizes and that even
your booby prize will be handsomer than the first prize was at Mrs.
Detwiller's."

"Ha, ha!" laughed Mrs. Budlong in a tone that sounded just like the
spelling.

Mrs. Budlong's wealth seemed to be accepted as a sort of municipal
legacy.  All Carthage assumed to own it in community, and to enjoy it
with her.  Her walls rang with the hilarity of her neighbors.  But her
laughter took on more and more the sound of icicles snapping from the
eaves of a shed.

She became the logical candidate for all the chief offices in clubs and
societies and circles.  She suddenly found herself seven or eight
presidents and at least eleven chairwomen.  The richest woman in town
heretofore was Mrs. Foster Herpers, wife of the pole and shaft
manufacturer.  He owned about half of the real estate in town, but his
wife had to distill expenses out of him in pennies.  With a profound
sigh of relief she resigned all her honors in Mrs. Budlong's favor.

Being president chiefly meant lending one's house for meetings as well
as one's china and tea and sandwiches, and being five dollars ahead of
anybody else in every subscription.  Mrs. Budlong was panic-stricken
with her own success, for there is nothing harder to handle than a
dam-break of prosperity.

Worse yet, Mr. Budlong was ceasing to be the meek thing of yore.  Every
day was the first of the month with him.

It was well on in November when he flung himself into a Morris chair
one evening and groaned aloud:

"I don't believe Aunt Ida ever left any money.  If she did I don't
believe we'll ever get any of it.  And if we do, I know we'll not have
a sniff at it before January.  One of the lawyers has been called
abroad on another case.  We've got to stay in Carthage, at least over
Christmas."

"Christmas!" The word crackled and sputtered in Mrs. Budlong's brain
like a fuse in the dark.  The past month had been so packed with other
excitements that she had forgotten the very word.  Now it blew up and
came down as if one of her own unstable Christmas trees had toppled
over on her with all its ropes of tinsel, its lambent tapers, and its
eggshell splendors.




V

THE BITER BIT

First, Mrs. Budlong felt amazement that she could have so ignored the
very focus of her former ambition.  Then she felt shame at her
unpreparedness.  She caught the evening paper out of her husband's
lap to find the date.  November ninth and not a Christmas thing
begun.  Yet a few days and the news-stands would have apprised her
that Christmas was coming, for by the middle of November all the
magazines put on their holly and their chromos of the three Magi and
their Santa Clauses, as women put on summer straw hats at Easter.

Mrs. Budlong's hands sought and wrung each other as if in mutual
reproach.  They had been pouring tea and passing wafers when they
should have been Dorcassing at their Christmas tasks.  It had been
left for her husband of all people to warn her that her own special
Bacchanal was imminent.

If he had been a day later, the neighbors would have anticipated him
as well as the magazines.  The Christmas idea seemed to strike the
whole town at once.  Mrs. Budlong became the victim of her own
classic device of pretending to let slip a secret.  The townswomen
shamelessly turned her own formula against her.

Mrs. Detwiller met her at church and said:

"Yesterday morning at eleven I had the most curious presentiment, my
dear.  I remember the hour so exactly because I've been making it a
rule to begin work on your Christmas present every morning at--  Oh,
but I didn't inTend to let you know.  No, dearie, I won't tell you
what it is.  But I can't help believing it's Just what you'll need in
New York."

Myra Eppley, with whom Mrs. Budlong had never exchanged Christmas
presents, at all, but with whom an intimacy had sprung up since Mrs.
Budlong came into the reputation of her money--Myra Eppley had the
effrontery to call up on the telephone and say:

"Would you mind telling me, my dear, the shade of wall paper you're
going to have in your New York parlor, because I'm making you the
daintiest little--well, no matter, but will you tell me?"

Poor Mrs. Budlong almost swooned from the telephone.  She did not
know what the color of her wall paper would be in New York.  She did
not know that she would ever have wall paper in New York.  She only
knew that Myra Eppley, too, was calling her "my dear."  Myra Eppley
also was going to give her a Christmas present.  And would have to be
given one.

Mrs. Budlong had received fair warning, but she felt about as
grateful as a wayfarer feels to the rattlesnake that whizzes "Make
r-r-r-ready for the corrroner-r-r."

Next, young Mrs. Chur (Editha Cinnamon as was, for she had finally
landed Mr. Chur in spite of the accident--or because of it) called up
to say:

"Oh, my dear, my husband wants to know what brand of cigars your
husband smokes; and would you tell me, dearie--it's rather personal,
but--what size bath-slippers you wear?"

When Sally Swezey came to the Progressive Euchre skirmish at Mrs.
Budlong's she noted with joy that her hint had borne fruit.  The
prizes were indeed of solid gold.  Mr. Budlong did not learn it till
the first of the following month when the bill came in from Jim
Henderson's jewelry store.

As if she had not done enough in forcing solid gold prizes on Mr.
Budlong, Sally had to say:

"I'm just dying to see your back parlor, my dear, this next Christmas
afternoon.  It has always been a sight for sore eyes; but this
Christmas it will be a perfect wonder, for I do declare everybody in
town is going to send you something nice."

This conviction was already chilling Mrs. Budlong's marrow.  Of old
she would have rejoiced at the golden triumph, but now she could only
realize that if everybody in Carthage sent her something nice, it was
because everybody in Carthage expected something nicer.  And her
Christmas crops were hopelessly backward.  At a time when she should
be half done, she could not even begin.  She had not tatted or
smeared or hammered a thing.




VI

DESPAIR AND AN IDEA

Days and days went by in a stupor of dull hopelessness.  Thanksgiving
came and the Budlong turkey might as well have been a crow.  In
desperation she decided to make a tentative exploration of the shops
now burgeoning with Christmas splendor; every window a spasm of
gewgaws.  Since she had no time to make, she must buy.

The length of her list sent her to the cheaper counters, but she was
not permitted to browse among them.  At Strouther and Streckfuss's, Mr.
Strouther came up and said with reeking unctuousness:

"Vat is Mees Bootlonk doink down here amonkst all this tresh?  Come see
our importet novelties."

And he led her to a region where the minimum price was MBBA-BDJA, which
meant that it cost 12.25 and could be safely marked down to 23.75.

She eluded him and got back to the 25-cent realm only to be apprehended
by Mr. Streckfuss, who beamed:

"Ah, nothink is here for a lady like you are.  Only fine kvality suits
such a taste you got."

By almost superfeminine strength she evaded purchasing anything.  She
went to other shops only to be haled to the expensive counters.
Storekeepers simply would not discuss cheap things with the
millionairess-elect.

She crept home and threw herself on her husband's mercy.  He had none
and she lighted hard.  It was the first of December, and in addition to
his monthly rage, Mr. Budlong was working himself up to his regular
pre-Christmas frenzy, when he always felt poor and talked poorer to
keep the family in check.

His face was a study when he had heard his wife's state of mind.
Forthwith he delivered the annual address on Christmas folly that one
hears from fathers of families all round the world at this time:

"Christmas has quit being a sign of people's affections," Mr. Budlong
thundered.  "It has become a public menace.  It's worse than Wall
Street.  Wall Street is supposed have started as the thermometer of the
country's business and now it's gone and got so goldum big that the
thermometer is makin' the weather.  When Wall Street feels muggy it's
got to rain and the sun don't dare shine without takin' a peek at the
thermometer first off.

"Christmas ain't any longer an opportunity to show good will to your
neighbors.  It's a time when you got to show off before your neighbors.
You women make yourselves and us men sick the way you carry on all
through December.  And the children!--they're worse'n the grown-ups.

"Old-fashioned Christmas was like old-fashioned circuses--mostly meant
for the young ones.  Nowadays circuses have growed so big and so
improper that nobody would dast take a child to one, or if you do, they
get crazy notions.

"When I was a boy, if I got a drum and a tin horn I was so happy I
couldn't keep quiet.  But last Christmas little Ulie Junior cried all
day because he got a 'leven dollar automobile when he wanted a
areaplane big enough to carry the cat over the barn.

"This Christmas trust business ought to be investigated by the gov'ment
and dissolved.  Talk about your tariff schedules! What we need is
somebody to pare down this Christmas gouge.  It's the one kind of tax
you can't swear off.

"And as for you--why, you're goin' daffy.  Other years I didn't mind so
much.  You spent a lot of time and some money on your annual splurge,
but I will say, you took in better'n you gave.  But now you're on the
other side the fence.  These Carthage women have got you on the run.
You'll have to give 'em twice as good as they send or you're gone.
You're gone anyway.  If you gave each one of 'em a gold platter full of
diamonds they'd say you'd inherited Aunt Ida's stinginess as well as
her money."

Mrs. Budlong went on twisting her fingers: "Oh, of course you're right,
Ule.  But what's the use of being right when it's so hateful?  All I
can think of is that Everybody in town is going to give me a present!
Everybody!"

"Can't you take your last year's presents and pass 'em along to other
folks?"

"Everybody would recognize them, and I'd be the talk of the town."

"You're that anyway, so what difference does it make?"

"I'd rather die."

"You'd save a lot of money and trouble if you did."

"Just look at the list of presents I must give."

She handed him a bundle of papers.  He pushed up his spectacles and put
on his reading glasses, and instantly snorted:

"Say!  What is this? the town directory?"

He had not read far down the list when he missed one important name.
"You've overlooked Mrs. Alsop."

"Oh, her!  I've quarreled with her.  We don't speak, thank heaven."

"It would be money In your pocket, if you didn't speak to anybody.
Gosh!" he slapped his knee.  "I have an idea.  Stop speaking to
everybody."

"Don't he silly."

"I mean it."




VII

FOILED

Ulysses S. G. Budlong was a man fertile in ideas and unflinching in
their execution.  Otherwise he would never have attained his present
unquestioned supremacy, as the leading hay and feed merchant in
Carthage.

"It's as easy as falling off a log," he urged.  "You women are always
spatting about something.  Now's your chance to capitalize your spats."

"Men are such im-boo-hoo-ciles!" was Mrs. Budlong's comment, as she
began to weep.  Her husband patted her with a timid awkwardness as if
she were the nose of a strange horse.  "There! there! we'll fix this up
fine.  What did you quarrel with Mrs. Alsop about?"

"She told Sally Swezey and Sally Swezey told me--that I used my
Carthage presents to send to relatives in other towns."

"She flattered you at that," said Mr. Budlong unconsolingly.  "But
don't you dream of forgiving her till after Christmas."

Mrs. Budlong was having such a good cry, and enjoying the optical hath
so heartily, that her grief became very precious to her.  It suggested
what a beautiful thing grief is to those who make a fine art of it.

She smiled wet-liddedly.  "There is nothing in your idea, Ulie, but it
has suggested a good one to me.  I'll announce that I can't celebrate
Christmas because of our great grief for Aunt Ida."

"Great grief!" Mr.  Budlong echoed.  "Why, you couldn't have celebrated
Aunt Ida's finish more joyous without you'd serenaded her in Woodlawn
with a brass band."

"Ulysses Budlong! you ought to be ashamed of yourself for saying such a
thing!"  But she suddenly heard, in fancy, the laugh that would go up
if she sprung such an excuse.  She gave in:

"We'll have to quarrel with somebody then.  But what excuse is there?"

"Women don't need any real excuse.  You simply telephone Sally Swezey
that a certain person told you--and you won't name any names--that she
had been making fun of you and you'd be much obliged if she never spoke
to you again for you'd certainly never speak to her again."

"But how do I know Sally Swezey has been making fun of me?"

"Oh, there ain't any doubt but what everybody in town is doing that."

"Ulysses Budlong! how can you talk so!"

"If people without money couldn't make fun of people with--what
consolation would they have?  Anyway, it's not me but the other folks
you're supposed to quarrel with.  You spend an hour at that telephone
and you can get the whole town by the ears."

"But I can't use the same excuse for everybody."

"You'll think up plenty once you put your mind to it."  And with that
another excuse came in pat.  Came in howling and flagrant.

Ulysses Junior burst into the room, as if he had forgotten the presence
of the door.  He was yelping like a coyote and from his tiny nose an
astonishing amount of blood was spouting.

"What on earth is the matter!" the startled mother gasped.  "Come here
to me, you poor child---and be careful not to bleed on the new rug."

Ulysses' articulation was impeded with sobs and the oscillations of
three semi-detached teeth, that waved in the breeze as he screamed:
"Little Clarence Detwiller LICKED me!  so he did! and I on'y p-pushed
him off his sled into a puddle of ice wa-wa-water and he attackted me
and kicked my f-f-Face-ace off."

Mr. and Mrs. Budlong were so elated with the same idea that they forgot
to console their heart-broken offspring with more than Mr. Budlong's
curt, "First teeth anyway; saves you a trip to the dentist."  He nodded
to his wife.

"Just the excuse we were looking for."

"Sent direct from heaven," nodded Mrs. Budlong.  "You call up Roscoe
Detwiller this minute and tell him his son has criminal tendencies and
ought to be in jail and will undoubtedly die on the gallows.  Then he
won't speak to you to-morrow."

"You bet he won't.  He'll just quietly do to me what his boy did to
Ulie.  No, my dear, you tell all that to Mrs. Detwiller yourself."

Mrs. Budlong tossed her head with fine contempt.  "What cowards men
are! always shielding themselves behind women's skirts.  Well, if
you're afraid, I'm not.  I'll give her the biggest talking to she ever
had in her born days."

She rose with fortitude and started to the telephone, sneered at it and
glared at it.  Her husband stood by her to support her in the hour of
need.  He watched her ask for the number, and snap ferociously at the
central.  Then she fell panicky again and held the transmitter to him
appealingly.  He waved her away scornfully.

She set her teeth hard and there was grimness in her eye and tone as
she said: "Is this you, Mrs. Detwiller! ---- Oh, yes, thank you, I'm
very well.  I wanted to tell you-m ---- oh, yes, he's well, too.  But
what I started to say was ---- Yes, so Ulie says! ------ Yes, right in
the face ------ Oh, of course, ------ Naturally ------ Boys will be
------ ------ Oh, I'm sorry you punished him.  He's such a sweet child
------ ------ Oh, don't think of it.  I'm sure it was all Ulie's fault.
It will teach him better next time.  He's so rough! ------ ------ Oh,
really, how awfully sweet of you.  Good night, dear."

She stuck the receiver on the hook and looked for a hook to hang
herself on.  Her eyes were shifty with shame as she mumbled:

"I couldn't get a word in edgeways.  She apologized."

"She apologized!" Mr. Budlong roared.  "Why, you ate out of her hand.
And you were going to show me what a coward I-- Butter wouldn't have
melted--say, why didn't you kiss her?"

Mrs. Budlong was suffering a greater dismay than remorse.  "What d'you
suppose that cat of a Clara Detwiller's going to do?" she moaned.
"She's going to make her boy send Ulie a nice Christmas present!  And
now we'll have to buy one for Ulie to give to him!"

"Well, of all the--oh, you're a great manager, you are!  You call up a
woman to get rid of giving one Christmas present, and now you've got to
give two.  Here! where you going?"

"I'm going to that phone and tell Mrs. Detwiller what I think of her."

"You keep away from that phone.  Before you could ring off again her
husband would have a Christmas present wished onto ME!"




VIII

FOILED AGAIN

The next morning Mrs. Budlong arose from dreams of finding bargains
after all.  She felt a spirit in her feet that led her, who knows
how, to the Christmas-window street.  But the crowds and the prices
and the servility of the salesfolk drove her out again.

On her laggard way home she saw Sally Swezey, lean and lanky and
somehow reminding her of a flamingo.  Sally espied her from afar and
stepped a little higher.  Mrs. Budlong remembered her husband's
suggestion.  She made a quick resolution to do or die.  Her cheek was
cold and white and her heart beat loud and fast, but she tried to set
her double chin into a square jaw, and she passed Sally Swezey as if
Sally Swezey were a lamp-post by the curb--a common lamp-post by the
curb, and nothing more.

She heard Sally's gush of greeting stop short as if someone had
turned a faucet in her throat; she heard a gulp; then she heard a
strangled silence.  Then she heard Sally call her name tentatively,
tenderly, reproachfully.  Then she heard no more.  And she knew no
more till her feet somehow carried her home.  But she had hardly time
to flop into a rocker and utter a prayer of gratitude and pride for
having been vouchsafed the courage to snub a Carthaginian before
Br-r-rr!--the relentless telephone was on her trail.  She knew just
who it was and she braced herself to meet one of Sally's
sharp-tongued assaults.  But Sally said--in part:

"Oh, you poor darling dear, is that you? and how are you now?  I was
So alarmed for you.  You looked So ill and worn and--aren't the
Christmas crowds awful this year? and nothing fit to buy and such
prices!  and--you must be just worn out.  You really must spare
yourself, for do you Know what you Did, dearest.  You went right By
me without Seeing me, or Answering me!  Yes, you did!  I was so
startled that I didn't have brains enough to run after you and assist
you home.  I'm so glad you got there alive and I Do hope you're
feeling better and I'm so aShamed of myself for letting you go all
that way aLone in that pitiful conDition.  Can you ever forGive me?"

When Mr. Budlong came home for luncheon, Mrs. Budlong told him the
whole story.  He glared at her with an I-give-you-up expression and
growled:

"And when she said all that, what did you say?"

"I don't know." Mrs.  Budlong faltered.  "All I know is that she's
coming over this afternoon with a lot of that wine jelly I gave her
the receipt for."

"And what do you intend to do this time?" Mr. Budlong demanded.  The
skeptic in his tone stung her to revolt.  She could usually be strong
in the presence of her husband.  She looked at least like Mrs.
Boadicea as she said:

"I intend to tell Sally Swezey what you told me to.  And I will
accept no  apologies, none whatever."

When Mr. Budlong came home to dinner she avoided his gaze.  She
confessed that she had changed her program.  She hadn't the heart to
insult poor Sally, and she had admitted that she was a hit dizzy and
qualmish and she had--well, she--she--

Mr. Budlong finished for her fiercely:

"I know! You ate a lot of her wine jelly, and you told her she was a
love and you kissed her good-by, and would she excuse you from coming
to the door because you were still a little wobbly."

Mrs. Budlong looked at him in surprise: "She told you!"

"Nah!  I haven't seen her."

"Then how on earth did you ever guess?" she babbled.

"It was my womanly intuition!" he snarled, and that evening he went
down town and sat in the hotel lobby for a couple of hours.  He
usually did this anyway--in summer he sat on the sidewalk--but this
evening, he did it with a certain implication of escape.  He
expressed renunciation in the mere shutting of the door.

On the way home Mr. Budlong was busy with schemes.  His mind turned
again to his son.

In a smallish town, a growing boy is an unfailing source of _casus
belli_.

As an inciter of feuds there was something almost Balkan or Moroccan
about Ulysses Budlong Junior.  Nearly every day he had come charging
into the house with bad news in some form or other.  Some rock or
snowball he had cast with the most innocent of intentions had gone
through a window or a milk wagon or somebody's silk hat.  Or he had
pulled a small girl's hair, or taken the skates away from a helpless
urchin.  He had bad luck too in picking victims with belligerent big
brothers.

Mr. Budlong recognized these desperado traits and he fully expected
Ulysses Junior to make him the father of a convict.  Suddenly now
despair became hope.  Let Mrs. Budlong capitalize her spats; he would
promote Ulie's.  The affair Detwiller had turned out badly, but Mr.
Budlong would not yield to one defeat.  He watched eagerly for the
next misdemeanor of his young hopeless.  He relied on him to embroil,
as it were, all Europe in an international conflict.

But the dove of peace seemed to have alighted on Ulysses' shoulder.
He even began to go to Sunday School--the Methodist this year because
they had given the largest cornucopias in town the Christmas before.
And he talked nothing but Golden Texts till Mr. Budlong began to fear
that he would one day be the father of a parson.

Meanwhile, Mrs. Budlong grew bellicose again.  She snubbed people
right and left, but they generously imputed it to absent-mindedness.
She failed to go to the dinner party the Teeples gave in her honor,
and she sent no excuse.  This was the unpardonable sin in Carthage
and the Budlong chairs sat vacant through the dinner.

But Mrs. Teeple graciously assumed that she was ill and sent over the
cut flowers off the table.  And she hoped the poor dear would feel
better soon.

A few days later Mrs. Budlong's pet Maltese kitten was done to nine
deaths at once by the Disney's fox terrier.  Mrs. Budlong mourned the
kitten, but there was consolation in the thought that she could now
cut the Disneys off her list.

Before she could get the kitten decently interred in the back yard,
Mrs. Disney was at the front door.  She flung her arms round Mrs.
Budlong and wept, declaring that she had resolved to give the
murderous terrier away to a farmer, and had already sent to Chicago
for a pedigreed Angora to replace the Maltese.  It would arrive the
day before Christmas.




IX

WORSE, AND MORE OF IT

As if that were not enough for one day, in the afternoon Johnetta
Ackerley called.  She saw Mrs. Budlong at an upper window and waved to
her as she came along the walk.  When the cook arrived upstairs like a
grand piano moving in, Mrs. Budlong said in an icy tone:

"Not at home."

"But I told her you was.  And she seen you at the windy."

"Not!--at!--home!"

"But I'm after telling her--"

Mrs. Budlong could be as stern as steel with her husband or her
servants.  She cowed Brigida into lumbering downstairs with the
message.  Mrs. Budlong went to the window to triumph over her victim's
retreat in a panic of confusion.

Instead, she heard a light patter of footsteps and Johnetta Ackerley
hurried into the room.

"Oh, my dear, are you ill?  Pardon my coming right up, but the cook
takes so long and I was so worried for fear you were--but you aren't,
are you?"

Mrs. Budlong was at bay.  She glared at the intruder and threw up her
chin.  Johnetta stared at her aghast.

"Why, my dear! you aren't mad at me, are you?"

Mrs. Budlong smiled bitterly, and said nothing.  Johnetta shrilled:

"Why, what have I done?"

As a matter of fact, what had she done?  All that Mrs. Budlong could
think of was her husband's unused suggestion for a war with Sally
Swezey.  She spoke through locked teeth:

"It's not what you've done but what you've said."

"Why, what have I said?"

"You know well enough what you've been saying behind my back, and you
needn't think that people don't come and tell me.  I name no names, but
I know!  Oh, I know!"

Now, of course, everybody says things behind everybody else's back that
nobody would care to have repeated to anybody.  Through Johnetta
Ackerley's memory dashed a hundred caustic comments she had made on
Mrs. Budlong.  She blushed and sighed, turned away and closed the door
after her, like the last line of an elegy.

A surge of triumph swept over Mrs. Budlong.  Success at last.

Then the door opened and Johnetta reappeared on the sill with a look of
angelic contrition.

"I hardly know what to say," she said.  "Of course, I must admit I did
rather forget myself.  It was at the last meeting of the Progressive
Euchre Club and everybody was criticizing you for having solid gold
prizes when they were at your house.  They said it was vulgar
ostentation.  I didn't say anything for the longest time, but finally
when they all said your money had gone to your head, hadn't it, I admit
I did mumble, 'It seems so.'  But it is only what everybody else says
all the time, and I assure you I didn't really mean it.  Of course
nobody can behave just the same after they are a millionaire as they
did before.  But I am awfully fond of you and--and--"

"It was most disloyal," said Mrs. Budlong.  "And to think that after
tearing me to pieces behind my back, you could come and call on me."

It was a fine speech, but after she heard herself say it, Mrs. Budlong
had a sinking feeling that if she herself had never called on anybody
she had not criticized she would have stayed at home all her life.  But
Johnetta Ackerley took another line.  She threw herself on Mrs.
Budlong's mercy, and if Mrs. Budlong boasted of anything more than
another it was her mercy.

"I have just been at the church," said Johnetta, "helping to decorate
it for Christmas week, and I was hanging up a big motto 'Peace on
Earth, Good Will to Men' and I think it ought to apply to women, too.
I grovel in apology and I pray you to forgive me.  You can't refuse
your forgiveness when I implore it, can you?"

Mrs. Budlong wanted to but could not and the two women fell about each
other's throats and exchanged moan for moan.  As they were comfortably
dabbing each other's tears from their cheeks and sniffing their own and
laughing cosily after the rain, Johnetta giggled and sobbed at once:

"The idea of your thinking I didn't just love you--and me working my
fingers to the bone making a Christmas present for you!"




X

A WELL-LAID PLAN

In the Civil War there were over two thousand battles and the details
could not be reported in a lifetime.  But their result can be stated in
a phrase.  The same brevity must apply to the campaigns, the
stratagems, ballistics and tactics of Mrs. Budlong:  numberless efforts
at secession ended as a lost cause.

There was one more desperate struggle.  While only a few days stood
between her and her famous Christmas afternoons, she and her dour
husband were having a bitter council of war.  She had another attack of
inspiration.

"I have it! the very thing!  Why haven't we thought of it before?
Quarantine!"

"Quarantine?" echoed Mr. Budlong as if the word were gibberish.

"Yes.  If we had something contagious in the house and a quarantine on,
people couldn't come here with their odious gifts and they would be so
afraid to get ours that they'd be much obliged to us for not sending
them any."

For the first time in years Mr. Budlong paid Mrs. Budlong a sincere
homage:

"You're a genius.  It takes a woman to squirm out of a difficulty after
all."

He was so excited he actually kissed her--and he hadn't finished his
evening paper at that!

This overjoyed her so far that she fairly glowed.

"Oh, I'm so glad you approve, Ulie dear.  And you'll help me, won't
you?"

"You bet I will, ducky dove."

"That's glorious.  Now which will you pretend to have, yellow fever or
smallpox or--"

"Which will _I_ pretend to have?  Do you mean to say that you expect ME
to go bed with a fatal disease?"

"It doesn't have to be fatal, my love.  Just so long as it's
contagious, you know."

"Well, of all th--what's to happen to my business?"

"Why, you can call it a vacation.  And you can pretend to get well
after Christmas; or you can have the doctor say it wasn't yellow fever
after all."

"But I stay in bed for several days, eh?"

"Oh, you can move round all you want, just so 's't you don't go
outdoors, and keep away from the windows."

Mr. Budlong's admiration was reverting to its normal state.  He growled:

"You women would be an awful joke, if you were only a little funnier.
If you're so keen on this quarantine business you quarantine yourself.
You can have yellow fever, or scarlet, or green or any color you
like--robin's egg blue fever for all I care."

"But, my darling, I can't be having those things!  You know I don't
believe in them this year, since I became a--oh, it wouldn't do at all
for Me.  But You could have it because You believe in diseases."

"You bet I do, and I believe you've got softening of the brain."  He
paced the floor in an effort to keep up with his temper.  Eventually he
stopped short.  He remembered that his son had failed to help the
family out in its distress.  He said:

"Let Ulie have something."




XI

GANG AGLEY AGAIN

Mrs. Budlong felt a certain superstitious uneasiness, but was finally
won over, and Ulie was unanimously elected the scapegoat--or in more
modern form, the goat.

Ulie was in bed at the time sleeping like an innocent cherub and
smiling in his sleep.  He was dreaming of a great invention: he would
set a figure-4 trap near his fireplace and snare Santa Claus by the
foot.  Then from a safe ambush under the bed, he would assail the old
gentleman with his nigger-shooter till he laid him low, whereupon he
could rifle the entire pack at his leisure, and select what he
wanted.  Ulie had not been attending Sabbath School in vain.  The
lesson of the week concerned David and Goliath.

Prom such dreams as these Ulie woke the next morning to be told that
he need not leave his bed.  He had scarlet fever and must keep close
under his cover.

"Scarlet nothin'!" was Ulie's reply.  "I gotter go to a meetin' of
the Youth's Helpin' Hand Socirety this afternoon and I'll be darned
if I stay in any dog-on bed."

Mr. Budlong finally persuaded him--Ulie wasn't dressed yet and it
hurts worse on the bare hide.  Then Mr. Budlong hurried down town to
bribe a doctor and borrow a red placard of the board of health.  He
was just rounding the corner on the way home when he caught sight of
Ulie descending from the window by means of a knotted sheet.  Ulie
had only a nightgown on, and owing to the heavy wind it wasn't much
on.

He dropped to the ground before Mr. Budlong could reach him, then
darted away across lots barefooted through the snow towards the
Detwillers'.  Mr. Budlong treed him just before he reached the
neighbors.  But the boy would not come down till his father promised
immunity both from punishment and from scarlet fever.

The Detwillers were arriving on the run, so the father promised, hid
the scarlet fever propaganda in his inside pocket, wrapped Ulie in
his own overcoat and carried him home.  There was so much dread of
pneumonia that the guilty parents could not include Ulie in any more
schemes.  And they could think of no schemes.  The day before the Day
Before Christmas found them in a panic.  The Day Before found them
grimly resolved to stand siege.

On the blessed Eve they sat before their cheerless fire-front and
stared at the packages that had been pouring in all day long.  The
old postman had staggered under the final load and hinted so broadly
for a Christmas present that he got one--the first breach in their
solemn resolve.

They had excepted Ulie, of course, from the embargo.  But they had
been in such a flurry that they had postponed him till they forgot
him entirely.  The doorbell was rung so incessantly throughout the
evening that the cook sat on the hall stairs to be handy.  She piled
the packages up on the piano till they spilled off.  The piano lamp
was gradually sinking beneath the encroaching tide.  Presents were
brought in wagons, carriages, buggies, carts, by coachmen, gardeners,
cooks, maids, messenger boys, and children of all ages and dimensions.

On any other occasion Mrs. Budlong would have been running here and
there, peeking into parcels and restraining her curiosity till the
next day out of sheer joy in curiosity.  Now she opened never a
bundle.  She could only think of the morrow when all of these donors
found that reciprocity had gone down to defeat.  The Budlongs avoided
each other's eyes.  They were thinking the same thing.  The strain
endured till it tested their metal to the breaking point.  When three
enormous packages were brought to the door by the Detwillers' hired
man, Mrs. Budlong broke out hysterically:

"I just can't stand it."

"Hell!" roared Mr. Budlong.  "Get on your hat and coat.  We'll go
down and buy everything that's left in town."




XII

AN AMAZING CHRISTMAS

Holiday bargains in Carthage were not brilliant.  After being pawed
over for several weeks, they were depressing indeed.  When the Budlongs
strode into Strouther and Streckfuss's, it was nearly ten o'clock at
night.  The sales-wretches, mostly pathetic spinsters of both sexes,
were gaunt and jaded.  They yawned incessantly and held on to the
counters.

Even Messrs. Strouther and Streckfuss had the nap worn off their plushy
sleekness.  They were surveying the wreckage, and dolefully realizing
that some of the Christmas bills would not be paid by the Fourth of
July.

When the Budlongs made their irruption, they were not received
cordially.  Word had gone abroad that the Budlongs were buying all
their Christmas presents out of town.  They must be, for they bought
none in.  This treachery to home industry was bitterly resented.  Then
Budlong galvanized everybody with a cry like a flash of lightning:

"I want to buy nearly everything in the shop.  Get busy."

It was too late to select.  Mr. and Mrs. Budlong with their lengthy
list in hand sprinted up one aisle and down another, pointing,
prodding, rarely pausing to say "How much?" but monotonously chanting:
"Gimme this!  Gimme that!  Gimme two of these!  Gimme six of them!
Gimme that!  Gimme this!  Gimme them!"

They bought glaring garden jars and ghastly vases, scarf pins that
would disturb the peace, silly bisque figurines for mantels and
what-nots, combs and brushes that would raise the hair on end instead
of allaying it, oxidized silverized lead pencils, button hooks, tooth
brushes, nail files, cuticle knives, pin cushions, ink stands, paper
weights, picture frames, bits of lace and intimate white things with
ribbons in them--Mr. Budlong turned away while she priced these.

Strouther and Streckfuss were in a panic of joy at the situation.  They
managed in the excitement to work off a number of old horrors that had
been refused for years and years--ancient, dust-stained landmarks on
the shelves.  Mr. Strouther showed the things, Mr. Streckfuss wrote the
list of purchases,--he made many mistakes in prices, but strangely
never to his own damage; and the entire staff of assistants followed,
taking down, and wrapping up, and rushing parcels to the door, where
they were bundled onto a wagon.

Mr. Budlong should have been a medieval general.  He pillaged that
store with the thoroughness of the Crusaders looting Constantinople.

The town clock was striking midnight as the Budlongs dragged themselves
home.  There was much yet to be done.  Parcels must be opened, price
tags removed, gifts done up in pink tissue paper and gold twine, cards
must be inscribed and inserted and the parcels rewrapped and addressed.
The Strouther and Streckfuss driver had been hired at an exorbitant
cost to sit up and deliver the gifts.  The horses had not been
consulted.  They leaned on each other and slept, dreaming of oats.

The Budlong parlor was soon a hideous scene.  The husband would open a
bundle and sing out, "Who's this big immense pink and purple cuspidor
for?"

"That's a jardineer," Mrs. Budlong would gasp.  "It's a return for that
horrible cat those hateful Disneys are going to inflict on me.  Here's
the card."

She handed him a holly-wreathed pasteboard on which she had written,
"For Mr. and Mrs. Disney with most affectionate Yuletide greetings."

She indited cards as fast as she could think up phrases.  She sought
for variety, but the effort was maddening.  She wrote, "Very merry
Christmas," "The merriest of Xmases," "A merry merry Yuletide," "A
Happy Christmas and a Merry New Year," "Christmas Greetings," "Xmas
Greetings," "Yuletide Greetings," "Wishing you a--" "With loving wishes
for--" "Affectionate," and so on and so on and on and on.  She
scribbled and scrawled till slumber drugged her and her pen went crazy.
When she fell asleep she was writing "A Yuly Newmas and a Happy X-Year
to Swally Sezey."

The delivery man pounded on the door and wild-eyed Budlong let him in
from the night.  The man whispered that he'd have to start at once if
he was to make the rounds before his horses laid down on him.

Mr. Budlong called his wife, but she did not answer.  He shook her and
she threatened to roll off the chair on to a divan.  Mr. Budlong
straightened her out and gazed at her in hopeless pity.  He stared at
the chaos of bundles.

He seized the pack of cards from his wife's chubby fingers and ran here
and there jabbing pasteboards into bundles, regardless.

That is how Myra Eppley acquired an ash tray lined with cigar bands,
and why old Mr. Clute was amazed to receive a card offering him Mrs.
Budlong's "loving and affectionate greetings."  He was more amazed when
he opened the bundle.  It had ribbons in it.

There were other amazements in town the next morning.  In fact, it was
the amazingest Christmas Carthage had ever had.

As fast as Mr. Budlong stuffed cards into bundles, he loaded bundles
into the driver's arms as if they were sticks of wood.  The driver
stacked them up in his wagon.  He made seven trips in all and some of
the cards fell out and were stuck in still wronger bundles than before.
But both the driver and Mr. Budlong were too sleepy to care.  The
driver finally mounted his seat and called out from the dark:

"Say, Mr. Budlong, where do I leave these packages--on the porch, or do
I ring the bell?"

"Chuck 'em through the windows!  The more glass you break the better
I'll like it."

"All right, sir.  Get ap!  Good night, sir, and wishing you a Merry
Christmas!"

"Merry ------" said Mr. Budlong, reaching for a rock.  But even the
stones were frozen to the ground and the driver escaped.  As Mr.
Budlong closed his front door, a thread of crimson spun out along the
East as if somebody were going to wrap the whole world up in a red
string.  He did not want it.  He yawned at it.

An hour or so later, Ulie awoke and sat up with a start.  To his
intense confusion, he bumped the top of his little skull on the bottom
of his little bed.

He was calling for help when he realized that he had fallen asleep in
his ambush.  He peered forth to see if he had snared Santa Claus.

The figure-4 trap was erect and intact, but empty.  He crawled out and
ran to the row of stockings he had hung on the mantelpiece as a decoy.

The stockings were empty.

With a shriek of disappointed rage, Ulie dashed into his parents' room
to protest.

Their bed was empty.

He ran through the house, stumbled down stairs and into the back
parlor.  His father was snoring on a mattress of Yuletide parcels.  His
mother was curled up on a divan under the smoking piano lamp.  Her
hands were clutching strands of gold cord and her hair was pillowed in
pink tissue paper.  She was burbling in her sleep.

Little Ulie bent down to hear what she was saying.  He made out faintly;

"Mishing you a Werry Muschris and a Nappy Hoosier."





End of Project Gutenberg's Mrs. Budlong's Christmas Presents, by Rupert Hughes

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MRS. BUDLONG'S CHRISTMAS PRESENTS ***

***** This file should be named 12881.txt or 12881.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/8/8/12881/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
