The Project Gutenberg eBook, And Thus He Came, by Cyrus Townsend Brady,
Illustrated by Walter B. Everett


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: And Thus He Came

Author: Cyrus Townsend Brady

Release Date: January 5, 2005  [eBook #14606]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AND THUS HE CAME***


E-text prepared by Robert Cicconetti, Melissa Er-Raqabi, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 14606-h.htm or 14606-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/4/6/0/14606/14606-h/14606-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/4/6/0/14606/14606-h.zip)





AND THUS HE CAME

A Christmas Fantasy

by

CYRUS TOWNSEND BRADY

Pictures by Walter B. Everett

G.P. Putnam's Sons
New York and London
The Knickerbocker Press

1916







[Illustration: "No, No," said the woman, "I can't go with you now."]



To the Beloved Memory
of
Little Betty




Contents

       I.--THE BABY
      II.--THE CHILD
     III.--THE FRIEND
      IV.--THE WORKMAN
       V.--THE COMFORTER
      VI.--THE BURDEN BEARER
     VII.--THE THORN CROWNED
    VIII.--THE BROKEN-HEARTED
      IX.--THE FORGIVER OF SINS
       X.--THE GIVER OF LIFE
      XI.--THE STILLER OF THE STORM




Illustrations

   "NO, NO," SAID THE WOMAN, "I CAN'T GO WITH YOU NOW" (Frontispiece)

   AFTER A TIME SHE FELL DOWN ON HER KNEES. SHE PRESSED THEM AGAINST
   HER FACE

   SHE LAID HER HAND UPON THE KNOB OF THE CHURCH DOOR

   "IT IS HE," WHISPERED THE PRIEST; "HIS SORROW WAS GREATER THAN MINE"

   ABSOLVO TE

   THE CRY FOR BREAD




I

The Baby

"A LITTLE CHILD SHALL LEAD THEM"




I

The Baby


The heavy perfume of rare blossoms, the wild strains of mad music, the
patter of flying feet, the murmur of speech, the ring of laughter,
filled the great hall. Now and again a pair of dancers, peculiarly
graceful and particularly daring, held the center of the floor for a
moment while the room rang with applause.

Into alcoves, screened and flower-decked, couples wandered. In the
dancing-space hands were clasped, bosoms rose and fell, hearts throbbed,
pulses beat, and moving bodies kept time to rhythmic sound.

Suddenly the music stopped, the conversation ceased, the laughter died
away. Almost, as it were, poised in the air, the dancers stood amazed.
One looked to another in surprise. Something stole throughout the room
which was neither music, nor lights, nor fragrance, but which was
life--a presence!

"Do you see that child?" asked the wildest of the dancers of her escort.
"There," she pointed. "He looks like a very little boy."

"I see nothing," said the man, who still held her in the clasp of his
arm.

"He is strangely dressed, although I see him indistinctly, vaguely,"
whispered the woman. "He wears a long white robe and there is a kind of
light about his face. See, he is looking at us."

"I see nothing," repeated the man in low tones. "The heat, the light,
the music, have disturbed you; let me get you--"

"I want nothing," interposed the woman, waving the man aside and drawing
away from his arm. "Don't you see him, there?"

She made a step toward the center of the room. She stopped, put her
hand to her head.

"Why, he is gone," she exclaimed.

"Good," said the man, while at that instant the room suddenly rang with
cries: "Go on with the music, the dance is not half over." He extended
his arm to the woman again. "Our dance is not finished."

"Yes, it is," she said as the flying feet once more twinkled across the
polished floor, as everybody took a long breath and a new start
apparently unconscious of the pause.

"It is over for me. What I saw!"

"What did you see?"

"I don't know, but I'm going back home to my child. Good-night."

       *       *       *       *       *

Yes, the music had stopped suddenly. The man in the farthest alcove
turned to his companion. They were hidden by a group of palms.

"I wonder why?" queried the woman. She was deathly pale. Her eyes were
dark with fear, yet alight with passionate determination.

"When it begins," said the man tenderly, "we will slip away. My car is
outside. Everything is ready."

"That is my husband over there," said the woman.

"Yes," said the man, "he won't trouble you any more."

"That woman with him is leaving him," she said. "I wonder why." She
turned suddenly with a great start. "There is somebody here," she
whispered, staring into the back of the alcove.

"Nonsense," said the man, throwing a glance around the recess. "There's
nobody here but you and I. We are alone together, as we shall be
hereafter, when we have taken the step."

"But that child," whispered the woman, "with his strange vesture and
his wonderful face. His eyes look at me so."

"There is no child there, my dear," urged the man; "you are overwrought,
excited, nervous. The music starts. Let us go."

He stretched out his hand to the woman, but as he came nearer she shrank
back with her own hand on her heart.

"Oh," she said faintly, "he's gone."

"Of course he's gone," he answered soothingly. "Now is our time to get
away. Let me--"

"No, no," said the woman. "I can't go with you now. It wouldn't be
right."

"But you knew that before," pleaded the man. "Besides--"

"Yes, but I can't do it. He was there! His eyes spoke--I--don't touch
me," she said; "I'm going back to my husband. Don't follow."




II

The Child




"SUFFER THE LITTLE CHILDREN TO COME UNTO ME"




II

The Child


The employees had all gone home, carrying with them Christmas checks and
hearty greetings from the great man whose beck and nod they followed. He
sat in his private office absolutely alone. He had some serious matters
to consider and did not want any interruptions. His balance-sheet for
the year had been made up according to the custom of the firm before
Christmas instead of on New Year's Day. He examined it again. It showed
tremendous profit. The mills were turning out quantities of material,
the demand for which was greater and the cost of production less than
ever before.

"I tell you," said the man to himself, "it was a master-stroke to
displace the men with children in the mills. They have reduced the cost
by four fifths. War has made the prices go up. This is not wealth, it is
riches beyond calculation."

He picked up a letter, read it over. It was a proposal from the
superintendent to clear more land, to build more buildings, to install
more machines, to employ more children and increase the profits greatly.

"I'll do it," said the man. "We can crush opposition absolutely. I'll
control the markets of the world. I'll build a fortune upon this
foundation so great that no one can comprehend it."

He stopped, leaned back in his chair, lifted his eyes up toward the
ceiling of the room and saw beyond it the kingdoms of this world and the
means unlimited to make him lord and master. He gave no thought to the
foundations, only to the structure erected by his fancy. How long he
indulged in dreams he scarcely realized, but presently he put his hands
on the arms of the chair and started to rise, saying,

"I'll telegraph the superintendent to go ahead."

He had scarcely formulated the words when right in front of him, seated
on his desk, he saw a young lad regarding him intently. He stopped,
petrified, in the position he had assumed.

"How did you get in? What are you doing here?" he asked. There was no
answer. "Come," said the man, shrinking back. "I can't imagine how you
got in here. If my people had not all gone I should hold them to strict
account. As it is, you--"

The room was suddenly filled with people. They came crowding through the
walls from every side and pressed close to him. Such people he had never
seen: wan, worn, stunted, pinched, starved, joyless. They were all
children, meagerly clothed, badly nourished, ill developed. They were
quite silent. They did not cry. They did not protest. They did not
argue. They did not plead. They did not laugh. They just looked at him.
They made no sound of any sort. He had children of his own and he had
known many children. He had never known so many gathered together
without a smile or a laugh.

His eye wandered around the room. They were very close to him and yet
they did not touch him. He turned to the desk where the lad had sat, but
he was no longer there and yet he well remembered his face. He knew
exactly how he looked. He turned to the nearest child and in some
strange way, although the poor, wretched face had not changed, his look
suggested the lad who had been his first visitor. He turned to another
and another. They all looked back at him in the same way with the same
eyes.

He threw his head up again and saw the castle of success of which he had
dreamed. He looked down again. This was the foundation. Slowly his hand
went to the desk. The little crowding figures drew back to give him
freedom of movement as he stretched his hand out for a telegraph-blank.
He drew it to him. He seized a pen and wrote rapidly:

"Build no more mills, take the children out of those already in
operation, put men in their places. We will be content with less profit
in the future."

He read over the telegram. The telephone was close at hand. He called up
the telegraph-office, dictated it and directed it to be sent
immediately. He had been so engrossed in this task that he had noticed
nothing else. Now he looked up. The room was still filled with children,
but they were all laughing. It was a soundless laugh, and yet he heard
it. And then the room was empty save for the child he had seen first and
vaguely. He had just time to catch a smile from his lips and then he,
too, was gone as silently and as strangely as he had appeared.

Was it a dream? No, there was the telegram in his hand! Had he sent it?
Again he called up the office on the telephone.

"Did you get a message from me just a minute ago?"

"Yes, do you want to recall it?"

The man thought a second.

"No," he said quietly--was it to himself or to his vanished
visitors?--"let it go. Merry Christmas."




III

The Friend




"INASMUCH AS YE HAVE DONE IT UNTO ONE OF THE LEAST OF THESE, MY
BRETHREN"




III

The Friend


"Is the story of the Christ Child true, Mommy?" quivered one little,
thin voice.

"Yes, they told us it was over at the mission Sunday-school," said the
littlest child.

"I don't believe it," answered the mother. "God ain't never done much
for me."

"It's Christmas eve, ain't it?" asked the boy, climbing up on the thin
knees of the threadbare woman and nestling his thin face against a
thinner breast which the rags scarcely covered decently.

"Yes, it's Christmas eve."

"And that's the day He came, ain't it?" urged the oldest girl.

"They say so."

"Don't you believe it, Mommy?"

"I used to believe it when I was a girl. I believed it before your
father died, but now--"

"Don't you believe it now?" repeated the first child.

"How can I believe it? You're old enough to understand. That's the last
scuttle of coal we got. We ate the last bit of bread for supper
to-night."

"They say," put in the little boy, "that if you hang up your stockings,
Santa Claus'll fill 'em, 'cause of the Christ Child."

"Don't you believe it, Sonny," said the mother desperately.

"I'm going to hang up mine and see," said the littlest girl.

"He's got too many other children to look after," said the woman, "to
care for the likes of us, I'm afraid, and--"

"But my Sunday-school teacher said He came to poor people special. He
was awful poor Himself. Why, He was born in a stable. That's awful poor,
ain't it?" asked the boy.

"When I was a girl," answered the mother, "I lived on a farm and we had
a stable there that was a palace to this hole we live in now. No, you'd
better not hang up your stockings, none of you."

"And you don't believe in Him, Mommy?"

"No. What would be the use if you hung 'em up and didn't find anything
in 'em in the morning?"

"It'd be awful, but I believe in Him," said the littlest girl. "I don't
think God has forgot us, really. I'm going to try."

"I tell you 'tain't no use."

"Oh, yes, it is."

"I'm sure it ain't. But have it your own way," said the woman. "If
someone would fill your stockings with milk and bread and--"

"I want a turkey," said the oldest girl.

"And cranberry sauce," added the boy.

"I want a doll-baby in mine," said the littlest girl.

The mother hid her face and groaned aloud.

"You ain't sick, are you, Mommy?"

"I guess so. Come, you'd better say your prayers and go to bed. We don't
have to keep the fire going so hard when you're all covered up."

It did not take long for the three little youngsters to divest
themselves of the rags of clothing they wore. They slept in what passed
for their underclothes, so there was no donning of white gowns for the
night.

"Here are our stockings, Mommy," said the oldest, handing three ragged,
almost footless, black stockings to the woman.

"It's no use, I tell you. I can't do it."

"It won't do any harm, Mommy," urged the girl.

"Do you believe in it, too?" asked the mother, and the girl shook her
head. "You won't be disappointed in the morning if there's nothing in
'em?"

"No, I suppose it will be because Santa Claus was too busy."

With nervous fingers the woman hung the three stockings near the window.
She was hungry, she was cold, she was broken, she was a mother. She
could scarcely keep from crying.

"Maybe you'll be glad you did it," said the littlest girl drowsily.

"Ain't you comin' to bed, too, Mommy?" asked the oldest, beneath the
covers over the mattress on the floor.

"In a little while."

"And you won't forget to say your prayers?"

"I ain't said 'em for months, ever since your father was killed, and we
got so poor."

"But you'll say 'em to-night 'cause it's Christmas eve?"

"Yes, to-night," said the mother; "now you go to sleep."

"Are you waitin' for him to come, Mommy?" asked the littlest girl, who
was very sleepy.

"Yes," said the mother.

Presently, as she sat in the dark, having turned out the light, the deep
breathing of the children told her they were asleep. She rose quietly,
stepped to the window, and stood looking at the three shapeless,
tattered stockings. She was high up in the tenement and the moonlight
came softly over the house roofs of the city into the bare, cold,
cheerless room. She stared at the stockings and tears streamed down her
wasted cheeks. She had hung them low at the suggestion of the littlest
girl so the children could easily get at them in the morning.

[Illustration: She pressed them against her face.]

After a time she fell down on her knees. She pressed them against her
face. She did not say anything. She could scarcely think anything. She
just knelt there until something gently drew her head around. She
dropped the stockings. She put her right hand on the window-ledge to
steady herself and looked backward.

No sound save the breathing of the children and her own stifled sobs had
broken the silence; the door was shut, but a man was there, a man of
strange vesture seen dimly in the moon's radiance, yet there was a kind
of light about his face. She could see his features. They were those of
a man in middle years. They were lined with care. He had seen life on
its seamy side. The woman felt that he had known poverty and loneliness.
She stared up at him.

"I didn't believe," she whispered; "it cannot be. I thought we were
forgotten."

The man slowly raised his hand. The moonlight struck fair upon it. She
saw that it was calloused, the hand of a man who toiled. It was extended
over her head. There was no bodily touch, but her head bent low down
until she rested it upon her hands upon the floor. When she looked up,
the room was empty. There was no sound save the breathing of the
children and the throb of her own heart which beat wildly in the fearful
hollow of her ear.

She heard a sound of strange footsteps outside the door. There was a
crackle as of paper, the soft sound of things laid upon the floor, a
gentle rapping on the panels, a light laugh, a rustle of draperies,
footsteps moving away. As in a dream she got to her feet, she knew not
how. She opened the door.

The hall was dimly illuminated. Her feet struck a little heap of
joy-bringing parcels. She leaned back against the door-jamb, her hand
to her heart, trembling. What could it mean?

A tiny voice broke the silence. It was the littlest girl turning over in
her sleep, murmuring incoherently and then clearly:

"If you only believe, that's enough; if you only believe."




IV

The Workman

"IS NOT THIS THE CARPENTER?"




IV

The Workman


In the mean squalid room back of the saloon half a score of men were
assembled. They were all young in years, in other things not youthful.
Some of them lounged against the wall. Some sat at tables. All were
drinking. The air was foul with smoke and reeked with the odor of vile
liquor.

"We've got two jobs on hand to-night," said the leader of the gang.
"There's a crib to be cracked an' a guy to be croaked. Red, you an'
Gypsie an' the Gunney will crack the crib. It's dead easy. Only an old
man an' his wife. The servants are out except one an' he's fixed. I'll
give you the layout presently. The other job's harder. Kid, I'll put you
in charge, an' as it's got to be done early to-night I'll give you the
orders now. He'll be at The Montmorency at ten o'clock. Someone will
call him out to the street."

"Who?"

"Never mind who. You'll be there in the car."

"Whose car?"

"Never mind whose. Why're you askin' so many questions? It'll take you
an' the four to The Montmorency at ten o'clock. When he comes out every
one of you let go, the whole bunch, understand. If they don't find five
bullets in him there'll be trouble to-morrow."

"What do we get out of it?"

"A hundred apiece fer you an' a hundred an' fifty fer me fer engineerin'
the job. Christmas money! You get me?"

"Of course. How'll we know who we've got to shoot?"

"I'll be there myself on the sidewalk. I'll point him out to you."

"The police?"

"They're fixed."

"Easy enough," said the Kid, the youngest of the gang.

"Well, you guys," said the leader pointing out four of the men, "will go
with the Kid. The car'll be at the door in half an hour."

"Now, gimme my orders," said Red.

The gang leader scribbled something on a bit of paper.

"You go to that number with these two guys between midnight an' two in
the mornin'. You'll find a back winder open. Here's the combination of
the safe. The silver'll be in that."

"Jewels?"

"In a wall cabinet upstairs. It'll be unlocked."

"An' if they make any noise?"

"Croak 'em, of course. But don't make no noise doin' it. Better use a
blackjack. We're not sure about the cop on that beat."

"I understand."

"Well, git your gats and make ready. Before we go, the drinks'll be on
me. Fill up, men," he added, first pouring himself a liberal glassful,
"an' here's to bringin' it off easy."

With deep relish the toast was drunk by all save Red and the Kid. Red
set his glass down on the table. The Kid dropped his to the floor.

"There's somebody else in the room," whispered Red.

"Yes, yonder by the door," said the Kid. "You c'n jest see him."

"Don't be a fool," said the gang leader. "There's nobody here but us."

"He's wearin' strange clothes," said Red.

"He looks like a carpenter by his kit o' tools," said the Kid.

"Here, pull yourselves together, men," said the gang leader; "you're
dippy, there's nobody here. Where's your nerve?"

But Red made no move to obey. He thrust his glass from him and rose and
leaned over the table staring. The other men shrank back glancing at the
two figures, for the Kid had also dashed the proffered glass aside.

"I see him," he said, "he's lookin' at me, he's lookin' through me."

In his excitement he took a step forward and the table went over with a
crash. The two men passed their hands over their eyes in bewilderment.

"Why, there ain't nobody here," said the Kid.

"But I seen him I tell you," persisted Red.

"And so did I."

"Well, he's gone, whoever he was, accordin' to your own showin'," said
the gang leader contemptuously. "Now brace up. Take your liquor. Get a
move on youse."

"Not me," exclaimed Red suddenly.

"Nor me," said the Kid.

"What d'ye mean?"

"I won't do it."

"Neither will I."

Both men moved to the door. The gang leader sprang to intercept them,
his arms upraised, his hands clenched.

"Lemme pass," said Red.

"Are you goin' to give us away?"

"No," answered Red. "But you don't rob no house, an' you don't kill no
man to-night."

"You all know what that means," cried the leader. "Here you men grab
'em."

But the rest of the gang hung back.

"Mebbe they did see somethin'," said one.

"You cowardly dogs," cried the leader.

"We won't mention no names to nobody," said the Kid, "but you can't
pull them jobs off. We'll jest warn 'em."

"You swore you'd be true to the gang, that you'd obey orders an' follow
directions."

"We won't give ye away but I'm goin' to quit the gang an' go to work,"
said Red.

"Me too," said the Kid.

"Work! Hell!" exclaimed the gang leader, but they shoved him out of the
way and went out of the door.




V

Comforter




"NEITHER DO I CONDEMN THEE"




V

The Comforter


She was a daughter of shame. Even inexperience could see that as she
wandered up and down the streets of the town, desperate, impelled to go
on by a force too strong for her to resist. She trod the pavement, yet
loathed the necessity and hated herself for her compliance. She had only
to look forward to the jail or the hospital; yet there was always the
river. Had it come to that? Was there nothing else?

She lifted her eyes from the stone walk as hard as the heart of the
world, and found herself opposite a brightly lighted building. She
leaned against the door. From within came the sound of music, the
strains of a hymn, words of prayer. The light streamed about her face
from the stained window. This was a Church of God. Stained window,
stained woman, confronting each other in the night!

There was no God for her. There might have been once, but she had
committed the unpardonable sin against society and society was God.
There was no place for her anywhere, save the jail or the hospital or
the river. That last was the best. The street was deserted. She had
thought it not a good place in which to ply her trade! She made a step
forward and stopped.

In her pathway stood a figure seen dimly in the darkness. It stood in
the shadow beyond the broad light from the painted window. There was
something strangely familiar about it. She glanced up at that window.
Had the figure there stepped down and embodied itself vaguely on the
walk before her?

[Illustration: She laid her hand upon the knob of the church door.]

What was this strange figure? Who was he? As she stared, the outline
drew nearer. A man vested in long white draperies confronted her. He was
bareheaded and appeared insensible to the cold in which she shivered.
She put out her hand and something folded it back upon her breast. She
opened her lips and something sealed them.

As she watched, the figure slowly moved. It bent forward and went slowly
down on its knees on the sidewalk. The white hand began to trace
strange, mysterious, unknown, incomprehensible characters upon the
pavement. She watched with bated breath, some memory of another sinful
woman of whom she had heard in childhood coming back to her prostrate
mind. Yes, and there behind the figure stood others, hateful and hating,
very violent, passionate men. She stared from the handwriting in the
dust to these others and they faded away. She was alone with the
kneeling figure and, as she looked, it too vanished in the chill air.

She bent over the pavement. There was nothing there, yet she had
received a message. After a last glance she turned away, new courage,
new life, new hope in her heart.

She mounted the steps, she laid her hand upon the knob of the church
door, she turned it and went bravely within.




VI

The Burden Bearer

"HE, BEARING HIS CROSS, WENT FORTH"




VI

The Burden Bearer


The sound of the running feet of the man smashing through the burned
stubble ceased abruptly. He stopped at the threshold of the door. No
friendly bark of dog welcomed him. From the barn there came no gentle
lowing of cattle, no homely clucking of chickens. Like the house the
byre too had been ruined, gutted with flame.

The soldier whose march had brought him back to his own village that
night stood in the entrance of what had been his home and stared at the
smoking walls, the charred roof gaping to the sky, the empty casements.
The enemy had been there. He whispered his young wife's name, he called
softly to the baby, as if they might be sleeping somewhere within the
devastated house. He listened for a reply but none came. Perhaps he
would have been thankful even for a groan or a cry of agony, anything
that meant life. But all was silence within, without.

Yonder on the winding road at the foot of the hill he could hear the
trampling of men, the groaning of wheels, the clank of iron cavalrymen,
the jingling of bits and swords, sharp words of command. The army was
advancing. He could delay no longer. He must get back to his place in
the ranks. Summoning his courage he crossed the threshold and stepped
into the vacant emptiness of the house. Everything was gone but the four
stone walls. There were unrecognizable heaps of ashes here and there. He
bent over them fearfully in the twilight wondering whether the
shapeless, formless masses were--

Something caught his eye. The one thing intact apparently. He stooped
over it. It was the baby's shoe--white, it had been originally. He
remembered it. Now it was stained with blood. That was all that was
left--a little baby's shoe, blood spotted. He pressed it to his heart
and groaned aloud. A spasm of mortal anguish shook his frame. He lifted
his clenched hand toward the sky overshadowing the roofless walls.

Now he suddenly became aware that he was not alone. There was someone
else in the room. He saw vaguely, indistinctly, a figure strangely clad,
staggering on with bended back as if under some crushing load. He stared
in the twilight striving to concentrate his faculties. The figure passed
by. On its back was a shadowy something--beams of wood roughly crossed,
he decided. It raised its head and looked at him. The face was somehow
lighter than the rest.

The man's arm fell. The room was empty after all. He stared at the
little shoe. Was it somewhere well with the child, with its mother?
Unbuttoning his tunic he thrust the little shoe within, over his heart.
He straightened up. Away off on the road a bugle call rang out above the
tumult. He turned away, seized his rifle, shouldered it, stepped rapidly
toward his regiment and his duty.




VII

The Thorn Crowned

"THE SOLDIERS PLATTED A CROWN OF THORNS AND PUT IT ON HIS HEAD"




VII

The Thorn Crowned


It was ghastly cold in the ruined church. It had been warm enough there
during the day, but the fire that had gutted it had died like the young
acolyte, like the aged sacristan, the venerable mother, the sweet young
novice, the women who had sought shelter there in vain. Neither the
dignity of age nor the sweetness of maidenhood nor the innocence of
youth nor the sanctity of profession had availed.

The old priest was glad they were dead. Life after what they had
suffered had been unthinkable. He thanked God for that oblivion. He
wished that he, too, might die in that violated shrine where he had
peacefully ministered for so long a time. They had taken the flock, the
shepherd must follow. He should have led.

He had fought, oh, he had played the man for the honor of the poor lambs
committed to him. Had he done right? Should he not have stood dumb
before the shearers? They had shot him and stabbed him and beaten him
into insensibility. The last thing he had heard was the shriek of one
woman, the piteous appeal of another. They thought he was dead, but he
was living. Why had he not died?

How could God be so cruel? This was war. This ruined sanctuary, these
broken men and women who had sought only to serve Him! Was there a God
indeed? Faith, hope, what were they? Assurance, trust? Words, words! Ah,
how he suffered.

[Illustration: "It is He," whispered the priest. "His sorrow was
greater than mine."]

It was bitter cold and yet he burned with fever. The tremors of pain so
exquisite that they might almost be counted pleasure shot through his
ruined, torn, broken figure, yet he recked little of these. It was the
shame, the shame. He had been zealous for the Lord of Hosts. There was
no God. Men were not made in any image save that of hell. He could not
move hand or foot, but he could see. He could speak. He could curse God
and die.

As his lips framed that anathema he saw vaguely the figure of a
stranger; a slender, wasted body, dark stains upon it in the moonlight.
It wore some kind of curious headgear. The man stared. The light was
reflected from the sharp points of long thorns. A cloth was fastened
about the loins. The figure stood very straight in the desecrated Holy
of Holies. A light seemed to come from its face. Its eyes looked at the
man with great pity. Slowly the figure raised its arms. Slowly the arms
extended themselves; there were blood-stains in the palms of the hands.

"It is He," whispered the priest. "His sorrow was greater than mine.
Lord, I believe."

He knew nothing more save that a great peace had suddenly stolen around
him.




VIII

The Broken Hearted




"ONE OF THE SOLDIERS WITH A SPEAR PIERCED HIS SIDE"




VIII

The Broken Hearted


"I'll get that man if I die for it," said the soldier. "He's found the
one position in the lines from which he can fire into our trenches."

"It's easier said than done," remarked his comrade, "and the minute you
cross that spot you come within his range. He'll put a bullet through
you before you can level a rifle or press a trigger."

"I'll not go that way," said the man.

"What is your plan?"

"You know that salient yonder on the right? I'm going out of the trench
there."

"When?"

"Now. I'll wrap myself in white. That little run of coppice will cover
me until I get within a few feet of him, then I'll have to chance it."

"Wish I could help you, old man. I'd like to get that man. He's shot six
of the best fellows in the company and--"

"You can help me by making a diversion to attract his attention. Keep
him looking at that alley."

A few moments later the soldier shrouded in white crept out of the
trench and noiselessly rolled down the slope to the bushes. The snow was
deep on the ground. There was no touch of color about the soldier. He
even thrust his rifle under the linen in which he had wrapped himself.
Outside the shelter of the trenches the wind blew with terrific force.
It was terribly cold. He had discarded his overcoat for freedom of
motion. Only his indomitable resolution kept him alive. He locked his
jaws together to keep his teeth from chattering. The ice-covered snow
under his bare hands almost blistered the flesh as he crept along.

He intended to use the bayonet. If he shot the man he was stalking alarm
would be given and he would be riddled with bullets before he got back.
He was willing to give a life for a life if it were necessary, but he
was reluctant to do so if it could be avoided. Cold steel would be
better. Cold steel! He smiled grimly. It would need some hot blood to
take the chill off the bayonet at the end of his rifle.

Slowly, almost holding his breath lest he be noticed, he edged his way
along. He had plenty of time for thought. This was not so easy a job as
he had fancied, not the physical part, but the mental strain. He could
shoot a man who was shooting at him, he could batter a man over the head
who was trying to do the same to him, but this stalking a man in cold
blood was different somehow. Cold blood! He laughed soundlessly at his
recurrent fancy. He went a little more slowly. Finally he stopped to
consider.

From the nook ahead of him in which the enemy had ensconced himself came
a sudden rapid rattle of rifle-shots. His friend back in the trench was
doing his part. The man was awake--on the alert. It would be something
of a fair fight, he thought with some little satisfaction. He surveyed
the intervening space beyond the coppice. The men in the trenches on
both sides would be awake, too. It would take him a few seconds to cross
that space and get at the man he was stalking. Could they shoot him
before that? There was some shelter where the enemy was. If the stalker
could get to that spot he would be protected for a moment from fire from
the enemy's trench.

It would take him a second or two to cross that space. In a second or
two what might happen? Well, he would have to risk that. At the very
end of the coppice he gathered himself together and rose slowly to a
crouching position. Another rain of shots came from the nook; the man's
rifle would be empty, he must give him no chance to reload. Now it would
be a fair fight with the bayonet.

He threw aside the white draperies that impeded his legs and in half a
dozen bounds the two men were face to face.

No shot had been fired. Yes, the magazine of the man's rifle was empty.
He heard the crunch of his enemy's feet on the snow. He rose to his
feet, his bayoneted rifle extended. The two barrels struck with terrific
force. The men swayed, drew back for another thrust, and they were
suddenly aware of a mist-like figure between them, a figure draped in
white, lightly, diaphanously.

They stood arrested, guns drawn back, and stared. The figure slowly
extended its arm, carrying drapery with it. A man's breast was bared.
There, over the heart, was a great gaping wound, fresh, as if a broad,
heavy blade had pierced it.

There was a clatter on the ice as a gun dropped and another clatter as a
similar weapon struck the stone opposite. The two men bent forward,
their hands outstretched. They took a step as if to touch the figure and
there was nothing there! The hands met. They clasped warmly in the cold
against each other.

"My God, what was that?" said the stalker.

"I don't know," answered the other.

"A pierced side!"

"Was it--"

"No. It couldn't be."

"Well, we worship the same God and--"

Ah, they were seen. There were quick words of command from the
trenches, a staccato of rifle-shots, and two bodies lay side by side,
hands still clasped, while the snow reddened and reddened beneath them.

And it was Christmas eve.




IX

The Forgiver of Sins




"I SAY UNTO THEE UNTIL SEVENTY TIMES SEVEN"




IX

The Forgiver of Sins


"A Priest, for Christ's sake, a priest," moaned the man.

A white-faced sister of charity upon whom had developed the appalling
task of caring for the long rows of wounded at the dressing station
before they were entrained and sent south to the hospital, hovered over
the stretcher.

"My poor man," she whispered, "there is no priest here."

"I can't die without confession--absolution," was the answer. "A priest,
get me a priest."

Next to and almost touching the cot on which the speaker writhed in his
death agony lay another man apparently in a profound stupor. He wore
the uniform of a private soldier and his eyes were bandaged. His face
had been torn to pieces by shrapnel, fragments of which had blinded him.
At that instant he came out of that stupor. Perhaps the familiar words
recalled him to himself. He moved his hand slightly. The sister saw his
lips tremble. She bent low.

"Who seeks confession, absolution?" he whispered. "I am a priest."

"You are wounded, dying, father."

"How can I die better than shriving a fellow sinner?"

That was true. The heroic woman turned to the man who still kept up his
monotonous appeal.

"The man next to you," she said, "dying like you, is a priest."

"Father," cried the first man with sudden strength. "I must confess
before I die."

"Lift me up," said the priest.

The woman slipped her arm about his shoulders and raised him.

"The sister?" began the other.

"I shall be blind and deaf," said the woman.

"Speak on," whispered the priest.

"I have been a great sinner--there isn't time to confess all."

"What is heaviest upon your soul, my son?"

"A woman's fate."

"Ah."

"There were two who loved her--a dozen years ago--she preferred me--I
took her away."

"Did you marry her?"

"No. And then we quarreled--I deserted her. When I came to seek her she
was gone--young, innocent, penniless, alone in Paris--I have sought her
and never found her."

"What is your name?" asked the priest suddenly with a fierce note in
his quivering voice.

"Father, can I be forgiven?" answered the man giving his name.

The dying soldier stared anxiously up at his bandaged comrade, at the
nun who had hid her face behind the shoulder of the priest. He noticed
that her body was shaking.

"And the woman's name?"

The priest suddenly sat upright. He shook off the sister's restraining
hand. He tore the bandage from his own face. He bent over the dying man
as he murmured the woman's name.

"Wretch," he cried, "look at me."

His face was gashed and cut and torn but something remained by which the
other recognized him.

"You!" he cried shrinking away.

"I loved her, too," said the priest. "I would have married her. When
she went away with you Holy Church received me."

"Mercy," cried the soldier uplifting his hand.

"What mercy did you show her?"

The priest could not see but he could feel. His hand seized the other's
throat.

"My father," interposed the nun. "He has confessed. God will forgive,
even as I."

"Who are you?" asked the blind priest, fearfully.

"The woman!" cried the dying man shaking off the other's hand and
lifting himself up.

The sight came back to the priest on the instant. The fierce agony that
filled his blinded eyes seemed to give place to the gentle touch of a
hand upon them. He seemed to hear a mighty word--_Ephphatha_--that meant
"be opened." Light flooded his soul. Looking up he was aware of two
figures. One of the twain, an old man, gray bearded, was appealing to
the other, clad in white raiment and youthful. And the priest suddenly
recalled an old and well-known story of a fellow servant who would not
have mercy.

"Father, forgive--" whispered the man before him.

As the voice of the dying sinner died away in the silence all was dark
again. The priest saw no more, but the horrible pain in his eyes did not
return. Over his torn features came a look of calm. He lifted his arm.
His wavering hand cut the air in the sign of the cross.

"_Absolvo te_," he murmured as he pitched forward dead upon the breast
of the dying.

And the woman tenderly covered them over.

[Illustration: _Absolvo te._]




X

The Giver of Life

"HE THAT EATETH OF THIS BREAD SHALL LIVE FOREVER"




X

The Giver of Life


Of the five specters in the boat three were without life. Those whose
faint breathing indicated that they had not yet reached the point of
death were too weak and indifferent to rid the boat of the bodies of the
others. Ever since the homeward-bound whaler had struck a derelict in a
gale of wind north of the Falklands and foundered, this little boat,
surviving the shipwreck as by a miracle, had drifted on.

For three weeks in vain they had scanned the horizon for a sail. Their
scanty supply of bread and water had been consumed in ten days.
Thereafter they had nothing. The baby had died first, next a man whose
arm had been broken by a falling spar in the disaster, and then the
ship's cabin boy. The survivors were a man and a woman. They were both
far gone. The woman was plainly dying. The man kept himself up by sheer
exercise of will.

Their drifting had been northward toward warmer seas. It was winter in
their home land and, though they knew it not, Christmas day. There the
tropic sun blazed overhead from an absolutely cloudless sky. There was
no vestige of breeze to stir the canvas of the solitary sail or ripple
the glassy surface of the smoothed out ocean. The boat lay still. Not
even the iron man at the helm could have lifted an oar. It had been dead
calm for days. Speech there was none except in the gravest necessity. To
talk connectedly was impossible.

After scanning the horizon for the thousandth time the man's burning
eyes sought those of the woman at his feet. He was astonished to find
them open. Her mouth was working, her parched lips strove to form words.
He dropped the tiller which his hand had grasped mechanically, and which
was useless since there was no way on the boat, and bent his head lower.
Some sudden recrudescence of strength which the dying sometimes receive
came to the woman.

"Death," she whispered. "Glad." She turned her head slightly and saw the
form of the child. "The Baby--and--I--together."

The man nodded. Tenderly he laid his hot wasted hand on the woman's
fevered brow.

"A priest," she said, looking up at him uncomprehendingly.

She was evidently going fast yet she knew what she wanted although she
was not conscious that she craved the impossible. It would appear that
she had been a good churchwoman. The man could only stare. He was no
priest, only a rough sailor.

"A priest," said the woman more clearly. "I want--a priest--the
sacrament." By some nervous convulsive effort she lifted her arms up
toward him beseeching, appealing. There was another kind of agony in her
voice that had not been present when she had moaned for water in the
days before.

"The sacrament," she insisted, "I die."

The man looked away. Hard by the boat where there had been but a waste
of sea rose a green island. A stretch of pleasant meadow met his eyes.
It was so close to him that if he had leaned over the gunwale of the
boat he could have laid his hand on the lush grass. Dumbly he wondered
where it had been before, how he had come upon it so suddenly, why he
had not seen it hours ago.

In front of him were hundreds of people, men, women, and children, plain
people in strange simple garb, the like of which he had never seen. In
front of these people and with their backs toward him stood a little
group of men, in the center a figure in white garments. A lad offered
something in a basket.

The man watched, amazed, awe-stricken, yet with a strange peace in his
soul. He made no movement to gain the shore. He only looked and looked.
The white-robed figure bent over the basket. He lifted from it a crude
rough loaf of bread. He raised his eyes to heaven, his lips moved. He
broke the bread and gave it.

As the sailor watched the island disappeared as suddenly as it had come.
The scene changed. Now he looked into a low room, dimly lighted with
strange lamps. Through an open window he saw the stars. The few men that
had stood about the man in the grassy meadow were alone with him in that
upper chamber reclining about a table. The man lifted from the board a
cup of silver. He blessed it and gave it. The fragrance of wine came to
the watcher.

He rubbed his eyes and looked again and before him spread the smooth
unbroken surface of the monotonous sea. The woman's voice smote his ear
again, higher, shriller, with more painful entreaty.

"A priest--for the love of God--the sacrament," she whispered.

The man tore open the last canvas bread-bag. It was tough material but
it yielded to his insistence. In the corner there was a single tiny
crumb they had overlooked. He lifted it gently with his great hand. He
held it up in the air a moment striving to think. He was an English
sailor and in his boyhood had been a chorister in a great Cathedral. The
mighty words came back to him. He bent over the woman.

[Illustration: The cry for bread.]

"Bread," he whispered. "The body--"

He shattered the water breaker with his fist. There was a suggestion of
moisture on the inside of the staves of the cask. He drew his finger
across them and touched it to the woman's lips.

"Water," he said hoarsely. "The blood--"

The terror, the yearning, disappeared from the woman's eyes. She looked
at the man sanely, gratefully.

"God bless--" she faltered and then her lips stiffened.

Some tag of quaint old Scripture that had impressed him when he first
heard it because of its very strangeness, but of which he had never
thought in all the years of his rough life since boyhood, came into the
man's mind now. He lifted his head as if to see again that figure.

"A priest forever," he gasped, "after the order of Melchis--"

He did not finish the word. The woman was dead. He knew now for what he
had been kept alive. His task had been performed. He bowed his head in
his hands and entered into life eternal with the others.

Presently a little cloud flecked the sky. Out of the south the wind blew
softly. The smooth sea rippled blue and white in the gentle breeze. The
little boat, cradling its dead, rocked gently as it drifted on.




XI

The Stiller of the Storm




"BE OF GOOD CHEER; IT IS I; BE NOT AFRAID"




XI

The Stiller of the Storm


"It's Christmas eve at home," murmured the young lad after he had said
his prayers and tumbled into his narrow berth on the great ship. "I
suppose they're trimming the Christmas tree now and hanging up the
stockings. I wish I were there."

He was very young to serve his country, but not too young according to
the standards of mankind to be a midshipman on the great steel monster
keeping the leaden deep. It was the first time he had ever been away
from home on Christmas day, too. The youngsters had all laughed and
joked about it in the steerage mess. They had promised themselves some
kind of a celebration in the morning, but in his own cot with no one to
see, a few tears which he fondly deemed unmanly would come. He had the
midnight watch and he knew that he must get some sleep, but it was a
long time before he closed his eyes and drifted off to dream of home and
his mother.

Athwart that dream came a sudden, frightful, heart-stilling roar of
destruction; a hideous crash followed, a terrible rending, breaking,
smashing, concatenation of noises, succeeded by frightful detonations,
as through the gaping hole torn in the great battleship by the deadly
torpedo, the water rushed upon the heated boilers, the explosion of
which in turn ignited the magazines. By that deadly underwater thrust of
the enemy the battleship was reduced in a few moments to a disjointed,
disorganized, sinking mass of shapeless, formless, splintered steel.

As the explosions ceased, from every point rose shrieks and groans and
cries of men in the death-agony hurled into eternity and torn like the
steel. And then the boy heard the surviving officers coolly, resolutely
calling the men to their stations.

He had been thrown from his berth by the violence of the explosion. His
face was cut and bleeding where he had struck a near-by stanchion. His
left arm hung useless. He had lain dazed on the deck for a few moments
until he heard the orders of his lieutenant. He was one of the signal
midshipmen stationed on the signal bridge. Whatever happened that was
the place to which to go; he still had a duty to perform.

Picking himself up as best he could, he hurried to report to the
lieutenant. With such means as were available signals were made. Calls
for help? Oh, never! Warnings that the enemy's submarines were in the
near vicinity and that other ships should keep away.

The captain was on the half wrecked bridge above. The boy noticed how
quiet he was, yet his voice rang over the tumult.

"Steady, men, steady. Keep your stations. Stand by. Be ready."

The old quartermaster whose business it was to tell the hours saluted
the captain.

"Eight bells, sir," he said, "midnight. Christmas day," he added.

"Strike them," said the captain.

And, as clear as ever, the four couplets rang out over the chaos and the
disaster.

"Christmas day," the boy murmured.

"She's going, men," said the captain, as the cadences died away. "Save
yourselves. Abandon the ship."

"Christmas morning," said the boy. "I wonder what they're doing at
home."

"Overboard with you, youngster," said the signal lieutenant; "I wish I
had a life-preserver for you, but--"

"Merry Christmas, sir," said the lad suddenly.

"Good God!" said the man. "Merry Christmas! They will think of us at
home."

What was left of the ship gave a mighty reel.

"Quick or she'll suck you down," the officer roared, as he fairly flung
the boy into the water,--and how he hurt that broken arm! "You can swim.
Strike out. Good-by."

The boy had caught a glimpse of the captain standing on the bridge as
the wreck went down and then the wild waters closed over his head. It
was frightfully cold. A hard gale was blowing. The waves ran terribly
high. His left arm was helpless. His head ached fiercely. What was the
use? Still the boy struck out bravely with his free hand. The instinct
of life! It was too dark to see. The sky was covered with drifting
clouds. Only here and there a little rift of moonlight came through.

"Christmas morning," he sobbed out as the waves rolled him over. "Oh, my
God!"

He felt himself going down. All at once the waters seemed to grow still.
It was suddenly calm. He was no longer cold. He threw his head up for
one last look at the sky and life and then he hung, as it were,
suspended in some strange way. He saw a figure walking across the smooth
of the seas as it had been solid ground. The figure drew nearer, the
wind seemed to have died away, but the draperies that shrouded it swung
gently as they would while a man walked along. The face he saw dimly,
vaguely, but there was light in it somehow. It came slowly nearer.

"Christmas morning," whispered the boy.

The hand of the figure reached down. It caught the boy's right arm. He
was lifted up.

"Home and Christmas morning," whispered the boy, closing his eyes.

The moonlight broke through a cloud and fell upon him. A wave rolled
over him and the sea was empty as before.


       *       *       *       *       *

He that hath eyes to see, let him see!



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AND THUS HE CAME***


******* This file should be named 14606.txt or 14606.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/4/6/0/14606



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
