The Project Gutenberg EBook of Jaw Musculature of the Mourning and
White-winged Doves, by Robert L. Merz

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Jaw Musculature of the Mourning and White-winged Doves

Author: Robert L. Merz

Release Date: April 17, 2010 [EBook #32018]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JAW MUSCULATURE--DOVES ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Diane Monico, and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net











UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS
MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

Volume 12, No. 12, pp. 521-551, 22 figs.
October 25, 1963


Jaw Musculature
Of the Mourning and White-winged Doves


BY

ROBERT L. MERZ


UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
LAWRENCE
1963




UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS, MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

Editors: E. Raymond Hall, Chairman, Henry S. Fitch,
Theodore H. Eaton, Jr.

Volume 12, No. 12, pp. 521-551, 22 figs.
Published October 25, 1963


UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
Lawrence, Kansas


PRINTED BY
JEAN M. NEIBARGER, STATE PRINTER
TOPEKA, KANSAS
1963

29-7865




Jaw Musculature
Of the Mourning and White-winged Doves

BY

ROBERT L. MERZ


For some time many investigators have thought that the genus _Zenaida_,
which includes the White-winged and Zenaida doves, and the genus
_Zenaidura_, which includes the Mourning, Eared, and Socorro doves
(Peters, 1937:83-88), are closely related, perhaps more closely than is
indicated by separating the several species into two genera. It is the
purpose of this paper to report investigations on the musculature of
the jaw of doves with the hope that, together with the results of other
studies, the relationships of the genera _Zenaida_ and _Zenaidura_ can
be elucidated.


METHODS AND MATERIALS

In order to determine in each species the normal pattern of musculature
of the jaws, heads of 13 specimens of doves were dissected (all
material is in the Museum of Natural History of The University of
Kansas): White-winged Doves (_Zenaida asiatica_), 40323, 40324, 40328,
40392, 40393; Zenaida Doves (_Z. aurita_), 40399, 40400; Mourning Doves
(_Zenaidura macroura_), 40326, 40394, 40395, 40396, 40397, 40398.

Thirty-seven skulls from the collection of the Museum of Natural
History of The University of Kansas and two skulls from the United
States National Museum were measured. The measurements are on file in
the Library of The University of Kansas in a dissertation deposited
there by me in 1963 in partial fulfillment of requirements for the
degree of Master of Arts in Zoology. Specimens used were: White-winged
Doves, KU 19141, 19142, 19143, 19144, 19145, 19146, 19147, 23138,
23139, 24337, 24339, 24341, 23592, 23593, 24340, 31025, 31276; Mourning
Doves, KU 14018, 14781, 15347, 15533, 15547, 15550, 15662, 15778,
15872, 16466, 17782, 17786, 17788, 17795, 19153, 19242, 20321, 21669,
22394, 22715; Eared Doves (_Zenaidura auriculata_), USNM 227496,
318381. Additionally, the skulls of the Zenaida Doves mentioned above
were measured. All measurements were made with a dial caliper and read
to tenths of a millimeter.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

My appreciation is extended to Professor Richard F. Johnston, who
advised me during the course of this study, and to Professors A. Byron
Leonard and Theodore H. Eaton for critically reading the manuscript.

I would like also to acknowledge the assistance of Dr. Robert M. Mengel
and Mr. Jon C. Barlow for suggestions on procedure, and Mr. William C.
Stanley, who contributed specimens of Mourning Doves for study. Mr.
Thomas H. Swearingen offered considerable advice on production of
drawings and Professor E. Raymond Hall suggested the proper layout of
the same and gave editorial assistance otherwise, as also did Professor
Johnston.


MYOLOGY

The jaw musculature of doves is not an imposing system. The eating
habits impose no considerable stress on the muscles; the mandibles are
not used for crushing seeds, spearing, drilling, gaping, or probing as
are the mandibles of many other kinds of birds. Doves use their
mandibles to procure loose seeds and grains, which constitute the major
part of their diet (Leopold, 1943; Kiel and Harris, 1956: 377; Knappen,
1938; Jackson, 1941), and to gather twigs for construction of nests.
Both activities require but limited gripping action of mandibles. The
crushing habit of a bird such as the Hawfinch (_Coccothraustes
coccothraustes_), on the other hand, involves extremely powerful
gripping (see, for example, Sims, 1955); the contrast is apparent in
the development of the jaw musculature in the two types. Consequently,
it is not surprising to find a relatively weak muscle mass in the jaw
of doves, and because the musculature is weak there are few pronounced
osseous fossae, cristae and tubercles. As a result, the bones, in
addition to being small in absolute size, are relatively weaker when
compared to skulls of birds having more distinctive feeding habits
which require more powerful musculature.

The jaw muscles of the species dissected for this study are, in gross
form, nearly identical from one species to another. Thus, a description
of the pertinent myology of each species is unnecessary; one basic
description is hereby furnished, with remarks on the variability
observed between the species.

The terminology adopted by me for the jaw musculature is in boldfaced
italic type. Synonyms are in italic type and are the names most often
used by several other writers.

     ~_M. pterygoideus ventralis:_~ part of Mm. pterygoidei, Gadow,
     1891:323-325, table 26, figs. 1, 2, 3 and 4, and table 27,
     fig. 3--part of M. pterygoideus internus, Shufeldt, 1890:20,
     figs. 3, 5, 6, 7 and 11--part of M. adductor mandibulae
     internus, Edgeworth, 1935:58, figs. 605c and 607--part of M.
     pterygoideus anterior, Adams, 1919:101, pl. 8, figs. 2 and 3.

     ~_M. pterygoideus dorsalis:_~ part of Mm. pterygoidei,
     Gadow, 1891:323-325, table 26, fig. 7 and table 27, figs. 1
     and 3--part of M. pterygoideus internus, Shufeldt,
     1890:20--part of M. adductor mandibulae internus, Edgeworth,
     1935:58, fig. 605c--? part of M. pterygoideus anterior,
     Adams, 1919:101, pl. 8, figs. 2 and 3.

     ~_M. adductor mandibulae externus:_~ _a_) ~_pars
     superficialis:_~ parts 1 and 2 of M. temporalis, Gadow,
     1891:320-321--part of M. temporal, Shufeldt, 1890:16,
     figs. 5 and 7--part of M. adductor mandibulae externus,
     Edgeworth, 1935:58-60--M. capiti-mandibularis medius and
     profundus, Adams, 1919:101, pl. 8, fig. 1.

     _b_) ~_pars medialis:_~ ? parts 1, 2 and 3 of M. temporalis,
     Gadow, 1891:320-322--part of M. masseter and ? part of M.
     temporal, Shufeldt, 1890:16-18, figs. 5, 6, 7 and 11--part
     of M. adductor mandibulae externus, Edgeworth,
     1935:58-60--M. capiti-mandibularis superficialis, first
     part, Adams, 1919:100-101, pl. 8, fig. 1.

     _c_) ~_pars profundus:_~ part 2 of M. temporalis, Gadow,
     1891:321, table 27, fig. 2--part of M. temporal and ? part
     of M. masseter, Shufeldt, 1890:16-18--part of M. adductor
     mandibulae externus, Edgeworth, 1935:58-60--? part of M.
     capiti-mandibularis medius and all of pars superficialis,
     second part, Adams, 1919:100-101.

     ~_M. pseudotemporalis profundus:_~ M. quadrato-maxillaris,
     Gadow, 1891:322-323--M. pterygoideus externus, Shufeldt,
     1890:20-21, figs. 3, 5 and 11--part of M. adductor mandibulae
     medius, Edgeworth, 1935:58-59--? part of M. pterygoideus
     posterior, Adams, 1919:101, pl. 8, figs. 2 and 3.

     ~_M. protractor pterygoidei:_~ part 4b of M. temporalis,
     Gadow, 1891: 322-323, table 27, fig. 4--part of M.
     entotympanious, Shufeldt, 1890:19-20, figs. 3 and 11--part
     of M. spheno-pterygo-quadratus, Edgeworth, 1935:57.

     ~_M. depressor mandibulae:_~ M. digastricus s. depressor
     mandibulae, Gadow, 1891:318-319--M. biventer maxillae,
     Shufeldt, 1890:18-19, figs. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 11.

     ~_M. pseudotemporalis superficialis:_~ M. spheno-maxillaris,
     Gadow, 1891:323--part of M. temporal, Shufeldt, 1890:16--part
     of M. pseudotemporalis, Hofer, 1950:468-477--part of M.
     adductor mandibulae medius, Edgeworth, 1935:277.

     ~_M. adductor mandibulae posterior:_~ ? part of M. temporal,
     Shufeldt, 1890:16--part of M. adductor mandibulae medius,
     Edgeworth, 1935:58-59--? part of M. pterygoideus posterior,
     Adams, 1919:101, pl. 8, figs. 2 and 3.

     ~_M. protractor quadrati:_~ part 4a of M. temporalis, Gadow,
     1891:322-323, table 27, fig. 4--part of M. entotympanicus,
     Shufeldt, 1890:19-20, figs. 3 and 11--part of M.
     spheno-pterygo-quadratus, Edgeworth, 1935:57.

The terminology adopted by me is that of Lakjar (1926) except that the
divisions of _M. depressor mandibulae_ are designated by the Latinized
equivalents of the names used by Rooth (1953:261-262).

~_M. pterygoideus ventralis lateralis._~--The origin is fleshy and by
aponeurosis on the ventral side of the palatine anterior to the
palatine fossa. The insertion is fleshy on the ventromedial surface of
the lower mandible and continues along the anteromedial surface of the
internal angular process to its distal tip. A few fibers leave _pars
lateralis_ and insert on an aponeurosis which receives also all the
fibers of _M. pterygoideus dorsalis lateralis_. The latter fact may
have prompted Rooth (1953:257) to make the statement that the fibers
originating on the dorsal part of the palatine inserted more laterally
than those originating on the ventral side. Rooth worked with _Columba
palumbus_, the Woodpigeon, and his description concerned _M. adductor
mandibulae internus pterygoideus_, which is composed of _Mm.
pterygoideus ventralis et dorsalis_ of Lakjar (1926). His assertion
that ventral fibers, that is to say, fibers arising on the ventral
surface of the palatine, insert medially does not appear to be
completely true for doves.

Aponeuroses cover most of the lower surface of the muscle and one or
two nerves extend into the substance of the muscle. The nerves run from
the anterior edge of _M. pterygoideus dorsalis medialis_ and farther
posteriorly from a separation in the muscle.

~_M. pterygoideus ventralis medialis._~--The origin is by aponeurosis
from the ventral surface of the palatine and fleshy from the palatine
fossa. The aponeurosis is the same that gives origin to the fibers of
_pars lateralis_. Part of the aponeurosis becomes tendonlike in the
middle of _M. pterygoideus ventralis_ and separates its two divisions.
The insertion is fleshy on the lower one-third of the anterior surface
of the internal angular process of the lower mandible, and by two
tendons on the distal tip of that process. Many of the fibers of _pars
medialis_ insert on the tendons. The fibers at their insertion are not
distinctly separate from those of _pars lateralis_ and there is
considerable mingling of the fibers. Consequently, the medial part of
_M. pterygoideus ventralis_ cannot be removed as a part distinct from
the lateral part (figs. 1, 4, 10, 21 and 22).

Ordinarily _M. pterygoideus ventralis_ does not cross the ventral edge
of the lower mandible, but in one white-wing the muscle was slightly
expanded on the right side and it could be seen in lateral view. The
homologous muscle in _Columba palumbus_ apparently is consistently
visible in lateral view. (See Rooth, 1953, fig. 6.)

~_M. pterygoideus dorsalis medialis._~--The origin is fleshy on the
dorsolateral surface of the palatine immediately anterior to the
pterygoid and also on the anterior, dorsolateral, posterior and
ventromedial surfaces of the pterygoid. The insertion is fleshy on the
ventromedial surface of the lower mandible and the anterior surface of
the internal angular process immediately dorsal to the insertion of _M.
pterygoideus ventralis lateralis_.

~_M. pterygoideus dorsalis lateralis._~--The origin is fleshy from the
dorsolateral surface of the palatine, anterior to the origin of _pars
medialis_ and the insertion is by means of an aponeurosis on the medial
surface of the lower mandible, lateral to the insertion of _M.
pterygoideus ventralis lateralis_. The aponeurosis crosses the medial
side of the insertion of _M. pterygoideus dorsalis medialis_. The
fibers run in a posteroventrolateral direction and insert on the
ventromedial side of the aponeurosis (figs. 1, 6, 8, 9, 13-22).

In one individual, a Mourning Dove, the origin of _pars lateralis_ of
_M. pterygoideus dorsalis_ extended to the pterygoid. With this one
exception the muscle was uniform throughout the several species.

~_M. adductor mandibulae externus._~--This is the most complex muscle
in the jaw owing to its system of tendons and aponeuroses. Three
divisions of this muscle were described by Lakjar (1926:45-46) and the
divisions appear to be distinguishable in the doves, but there is no
clear line of demarcation for any of the parts and the following
description is based upon my own attempts to delineate the muscle.

~_M. adductor mandibulae externus superficialis._~--The origin is
fleshy from the most lateral area of the temporal fossa. Dorsally the
origin is bounded by the base of the postorbital process and ventrally
by the temporal process. The fibers converge upon a tendon that passes
beneath the postorbital ligament and runs anteriorly among the fibers
of _pars profundus_. The insertion is tendinous on the dorsal surface
of the lower mandible in common with the dorsal aponeurosis of _pars
profundus_. The insertion is immediately anterior to the ventral
aponeurosis of _pars profundus_ near the medial edge of the dorsal
surface on a tubercle at the posterior end of the dorsal ridge of the
lower mandible.

~_M. adductor mandibulae externus medialis._~--The origin is by a flat,
heavy tendon from the temporal process. The tendon is attached almost
vertically on the temporal process. It twists approximately 130° as it
runs anteriorly, and becomes a thin aponeurosis, which gives rise on
its dorsal and ventral surfaces to many fibers that insert in a
fan-shaped area on the mandibular fossa. Fibers from the dorsal and
dorsomedial sides of the heavy tendon run rostrad and insert on the
ventral surface of the dorsal aponeurosis of _pars profundus_. From the
ventral surface the most posterior fibers converge on an aponeurosis
that inserts on a transverse crista on the dorsal surface of the
mandible immediately lateral to the ventral aponeurosis of _pars
profundus_ and dorsal to the insertion of ~_M. adductor mandibulae
posterior_~. The more anterior fibers insert fleshily on the mandibular
fossa. The tendon of origin is actually one with the ventral
aponeurosis of _pars profundus_, which is situated in a horizontal
plane. The insertion is primarily a fleshy attachment on the mandibular
fossa. Some of the fibers that arise on the dorsomedial and lateral
surfaces of the tendon of origin attach to another tendon, which
inserts in the midline of the mandibular fossa on a small tubercle near
the anterior end. Also, there is insertion by an aponeurosis anterior
to _M. adductor mandibular posterior_ as stated above. Fibers attach to
the dorsal and ventral side of the aponeurosis.

~_M. adductor mandibulae externus profundus._~--The origin is fleshy
from the medial surface of the temporal fossa, the posterior wall of
the orbit and the otic process of the quadrate. The origin is bounded
laterally by the origin of _pars superficialis_ and medially by the
origin of _M. pseudotemporalis superficialis_. Ventrally the muscle
lies against its own ventral aponeurosis, which originates on the
posterior wall of the orbit immediately above the articulation of the
otic process of the quadrate, and which also receives many fibers from
the surface of the quadrate. The insertion is primarily by means of two
aponeuroses. The most dorsal aponeurosis inserts on a tubercle at the
posterior tip of the dorsal edge of the mandible. The lateral tendon of
_M. pseudotemporalis superficialis_ converges with the aponeurosis. It
is superficial and there are no fibers on its dorsal surface. The
ventral aponeurosis inserts on a crista immediately below the insertion
of the dorsal aponeurosis. It receives fibers on its ventral surface
from the otic process of the quadrate, and on its dorsal surface gives
rise to fibers that insert on the dorsal aponeurosis (figs. 2, 3, 5, 9,
10, 11, 13-18).

The tendon of insertion of _pars medialis_ of _M. adductor mandibulae
externus_ does not become a superficial aponeurosis posteriorly in the
Zenaida Dove as it does in the Mourning and White-winged doves.

~_M. pseudotemporalis profundus._~--The origin is fleshy from the
medial and partially from the dorsal surface of the lower mandible. The
origin is almost completely anterior to and partly dorsal and ventral
to the medial (most anterior) insertion of _M. pseudotemporalis
superficialis_. The anterior margin of the origin is at the point where
the mandibular ramus of the trigeminal nerve enters the mandible.
Posteriorly the origin is bounded by the insertion of _M. adductor
mandibulae posterior_, and ventrally by a ridge that is situated about
halfway down the medial side of the mandible. The insertion is by
aponeurosis on the tip of the orbital process of the quadrate and
fleshily on the anterior surface of the same process. The aponeurosis
extends about three-fifths of the distance along the muscle and it is
dorsal or superficial to all of the fibers. Many fibers insert on the
ventral side of the aponeurosis (figs. 1, 5, 13, 14, 15, 16, 21 and
22).

This muscle is the most variable of all the jaw muscles. In the
Mourning Dove the muscle appears rather slender in dorsal view and in
the White-winged Dove has an enlarged lateral belly that gives the
appearance of a thicker muscle. In the Zenaida Dove _M.
pseudotemporalis profundus_ is intermediate in shape between those of
the other two species. This muscle will be discussed in detail later.

~_M. protractor pterygoidei._~--The origin is fleshy from the junction
of the sphenoidal rostrum and the interorbital septum. Fibers converge
on the pterygoid in anteroventrolateral and posteroventrolateral
directions. The posterior edge of the muscle is in contact with _M.
protractor quadrati_ with which its fibers mingle. The insertion is
fleshy on the posterior surface of the lateral half of the pterygoid to
its articulation with the body of the quadrate (figs. 6, 8, 9, 11,
13-20).

~_M. depressor mandibulae superficialis medialis._~--The origin is
fleshy from the lateral edge of the basioccipital where the muscle is
attached to _Ligamentum depressor mandibulae_ and extends in a lateral
direction to a point where the structures involved turn dorsad. The
insertion is by fibers and a light aponeurosis on the crista that is
situated on the posteroventromedial edge of the lower mandible.

~_M. depressor mandibulae superficialis lateralis._~--The origin is
fleshy from the squamosal region, slightly posteroventral to the origin
of _M. adductor mandibulae externus superficialis_. A thin aponeurosis
lies medial to the muscle fibers. The insertion is by means of an
aponeurosis that becomes tendonlike along the posteroventrolateral
crista and the posteriormost part of the ventral edge of the lower
mandible.

~_M. depressor mandibulae medialis._~--The origin is fleshy from the
lateral and ventral surfaces of _Ligamentum depressor mandibulae_. The
insertion is fleshy on the posterior surface of the lower mandible,
posterodorsal to the insertions of _partes superficialis medialis et
lateralis_ (figs. 4, 9, 10, 13 and 14).

The parts of _M. depressor mandibulae_ are difficult to distinguish
from one another because of considerable intermingling of fibers.

~_M. pseudotemporalis superficialis._~--The origin is fleshy from the
posterior wall of the orbit, dorsal to the foramen of the trigeminal
nerve, lateral to the origin of _M. protractor quadrati_ and medial to
_M. adductor mandibulae externus profundus_. The insertion is by means
of an aponeurosis that bifurcates at the point of contact with the
mandibular ramus of the trigeminal nerve, which is at the level of the
orbital process of the quadrate (except in the Mourning Dove where the
division is more anterior), and which inserts as two tendons on the
dorsomedial edge of the lower mandible posterior to the insertion of
_M. pseudotemporalis profundus_. The lateral tendon is superficial to
the dorsomedial edge of _M. adductor mandibulae externus_, and
converges with the aponeurosis of _pars profundus_ of that muscle and
inserts with it on a tubercle near the dorsomedial edge of the
mandible anterior to the insertion of _M. adductor mandibulae
posterior_ as mentioned before. The anterior half of the medial tendon
lies ventral to the lateral edge of _M. pseudotemporalis profundus_ and
the mandibular ramus of the trigeminal nerve. All of the fibers of the
muscle insert on the posteroventral surface of the aponeurosis before
it divides. Part of _M. pseudotemporalis profundus_ also lies ventral
to the medial tendon of _M. pseudotemporalis superficialis_ and, in
effect, the tendon is imbedded in the substance of _M. pseudotemporalis
profundus_ as it proceeds anteriorly. The trigeminal nerve leaves a
slight impression on the ventral surface of the muscle near its origin
(figs. 1, 3, 11, 13, 14, 15 and 16).

~_M. adductor mandibulae posterior._~--The origin is fleshy from the
anterodorsal and anterior surfaces of the quadrate body, from the
anterodorsolateral, medial and anterior surfaces of the orbital process
of the quadrate. The muscle also has an origin from the otic process of
the quadrate, partly fleshy and partly by a slight aponeurosis. The
insertion is fleshy on the dorsal and lateral surfaces of the mandible
immediately anterior to the articulating surface. This muscle also has
extensive insertion on the medial side of the lower mandible dorsal to
the insertion of _M. pterygoideus dorsalis medialis_ and posterior to
the origin of _M. pseudotemporalis profundus_ (figs. 1, 3, 5, 17, 18,
19 and 20).

The fibers of _M. pseudotemporalis profundus_ can be distinguished from
the fibers of _M. adductor mandibulae posterior_ because the
pterygoideus nerve passes between the two (Lakjar, 1926:55). Rooth
(1953:255-256) considers as part of this muscle the ventral aponeurosis
of _pars profundus_ of _M. adductor mandibulae externus_ and all the
fibers ventral to it. But I could not justify the inclusion of that
aponeurosis as part of _M. adductor mandibulae posterior_ in the doves
because none of the fibers of _M. adductor mandibulae posterior_ as I
have described it were attached to that particular aponeurosis.

~_M. protractor quadrati._~--The origin is fleshy from the posterior
wall of the orbit medial to the foramen of the trigeminal nerve and
also medial to the origin of _M. pseudotemporalis superficialis_. The
origin describes an arc in the horizontal plane until it reaches the
interorbital septum and the optic nerve. The insertion is fleshy on the
posteromedial edge of the body of the quadrate and the orbital process
of the quadrate and on the otic process of the quadrate. The muscle
also inserts on the ventromedial surface of the orbital process of the
quadrate and the adjacent area of the body of the quadrate (figs. 5, 7,
9, 11, 13-18).

_M. protractor quadrati_ possesses many fibers that arise from _M.
protractor pterygoidei_. Consequently, it is difficult to determine the
exact extent of the origin or the insertion of either muscle.


ACTION OF JAW MUSCLES

~_M. pterygoideus ventralis._~--Contraction of this muscle retracts the
upper mandible by moving the palatine posteriorly, and simultaneously
adducts the lower mandible.

~_M. pterygoideus dorsalis._~--This muscle functions in essentially the
same manner as _M. pterygoideus ventralis_. The result of having a part
of its origin on the pterygoid as well as on the palatine is to
facilitate retraction of the upper mandible.

~_M. adductor mandibulae._~--This is the chief adductor of the lower
mandible and the muscle functions solely in that capacity. In birds
having great crushing ability, this muscle is much larger and more
powerful and the skull is reinforced behind the quadrate in order to
withstand the pressure of the lower mandible against the quadrate
during adduction (Sims, 1955:374 and Bowman, 1961:219-222).

~_M. pseudotemporalis profundus._~--With origin and insertion on highly
movable bones, this muscle, when it contracts, retracts the upper
mandible and adducts the lower mandible. Like the pterygoid muscles,
this muscle, by itself, would allow the bird to grasp objects by means
of its mandibles. However, _M. pseudotemporalis profundus_ could
produce a more powerful grip because it takes origin farther anteriorly
on the lower mandible.

~_M. protractor pterygoidei._~--Contraction of _M. protractor
pterygoidei_ pulls the pterygoid anteromedially and causes it to slide
forward along the sphenoidal rostrum. This action aids in protraction
of the upper mandible.

~_M. depressor mandibulae._~--The depressor of the lower mandible is
the sole muscle other than _M. geniohyoideus_ involved in the function
of abducting the lower jaw of doves. Its size can be correlated
especially well with feeding habits of the bird. Other birds that force
their closed mandibles into fruit, wood or the earth and then forcibly
open them, belong to groups possessing enlarged depressors. Contraction
of the muscle pulls the postarticular (retroarticular) process upward
with the resultant downward movement of that part of the mandible which
is anterior to the articulation. Since there is no "gaping" in doves
the muscle is only large enough to overcome the inherent tone of the
relaxed adductor muscles.

In some non-passerine species as well as in certain passerines the
muscle also serves to raise the upper jaw by acting on the quadrate,
which is capable of rotating vertically on its otic process. Especially
in the gapers, where resistance is offered near the tip of the lower
mandible, contraction of the muscle pulls the entire mandible dorsad
thus forcing the jugal and palatal struts forward (Zusi, 1959:537-539).
The action supplements that of _Mm. protractor pterygoidei et quadrati_
and is enhanced by anterior migration of the origin of _M. depressor
mandibulae_.

There is no lifting action involved in contraction of the depressor
muscle in doves for two reasons--(A) the origin of the muscle is
situated much too far posteriorly on the skull, and, more important,
(B) the quadrate is not hinged for vertical movement. As will be
discussed later, it moves only in a horizontal plane.

~_M. pseudotemporalis superficialis._~--Like _M. adductor mandibulae_,
this muscle performs only the one function of adducting the lower
mandible, and like _M. pseudotemporalis profundus_ it is a synergist of
that muscle.

~_M. adductor mandibulae posterior._~--Although this muscle undoubtedly
acts as an adductor of the lower mandible, I believe that, because of
its disadvantageous insertion so near the articulation, its main
function must be concerned with firming the mandible against the
quadrate. This is to say that its function is partially that of a
ligament.

~_M. protractor quadrati._~--When _M. protractor quadrati_ contracts,
the quadrate bone is swung medially. This action, as mentioned
previously, results in protraction of the upper jaw, and, as a
consequence, its action supplements the action of _M. protractor
pterygoidei_.


CRANIAL OSTEOLOGY

The ability of most birds to protract the upper mandible, and the
structure of the skull which enables them to do so are responsible for
common reference to the skull as "kinetic" (Beecher, 1951a:412; Fisher,
1955:175). The movement is effected by muscular action on a series of
movable bones that exert their forward force on the upper mandible,
which in turn swings on a horizontal hinge, the "naso-frontal hinge,"
at the base of the beak. The bone initiating the movement is the
quadrate, which is hinged posteriorly by its otic process and which
ordinarily swings up or down depending on the muscle or muscles being
contracted at any given moment. The upward swing of the quadrate pushes
the jugal bar, which is attached to its lateral tip, along its
longitudinal axis, in an anterodorsal direction, and the force is
transferred to the upper mandible, which is thereby elevated. A
synergetic mechanism is simultaneously initiated by the same bone--the
quadrate. Since the quadrate body articulates with the pterygoid, the
upward movement forces the pterygoid to slide along a ridge in the
ventral midline of the cranium, the sphenoidal rostrum, thus pushing
the palatine forward and exerting an upward push on the upper mandible.

In the columbids the quadrate has a bifurcated otic process that
functions as the hinge. The posterior tips of the forks are situated
almost vertically (one above the other) and the movement of the
quadrate is not so much up and down, or vertical, as it is horizontal
(fig. 12). When the quadrate moves medially the upper mandible is
protracted; a lateral movement results in retraction. There is a
slight, almost negligible, upward movement of the quadrate. The
movements of the various bony elements were observed on a skull that
had been made flexible by boiling in water for a minute as suggested by
Beecher (1951a:412).

Also in the columbids the naso-frontal hinge is not constructed in the
same manner as it is in many other birds as there is not a simple hinge
across the entire base of the beak. In fact, there is no true hinge at
all in the area of the nasals, but those bones are extremely thin and
they bend or flex under pressure. Actually, the hinge is double or
divided. One part is on either side of the nasals. The hinges are
situated at the posterodorsal tips of two thin processes of the
maxillary bones and the appearance is not unlike that of half a span of
a suspension bridge having the hinges at the tops of the towers.
Several other species of birds share this type of hinge construction
with columbids.

The movement of the lower jaw is, of course, the primary operation
involved in opening the mouth. The lower jaw possesses a deep fossa at
its posterior end, or on its posterodorsal surface, which articulates
with the body of the quadrate bone. The length of that part of the
mandible extending behind the articulation is directly correlated with
the resistance offered the mandible in opening, since it is on the
posterior extension that the depressor of the lower mandible inserts.
The larger the muscle the more surface is needed for attachment. Also
the added length of the mandible posterior to the articulation serves
as a lever in opening the mandible, and the fulcrum is moved relatively
farther forward.

In birds lacking resistance to abduction of the lower mandible, as in
doves, it is nevertheless necessary for a slight postarticular process
to remain for the insertion of a small depressor muscle which, as
mentioned previously, is necessary to counteract the relaxed adductor
muscles of the lower jaw.

There are many exceptions to the rule that birds have kinetic skulls,
and usually a secondary fusion and reinforcement of bones around the
hinge has limited or eliminated all movement. Sims (1955) describes the
Hawfinch's immobile upper jaw, which is used as a powerful press in
cracking the stones of fresh fruit. Skulls of woodpeckers have been
modified somewhat in the same manner as a result of their foraging and
nesting habits (Burt, 1930).

The two most distantly related members of the genera under
investigation are the White-winged Dove, _Zenaida asiatica_, and the
Mourning Dove, _Zenaidura macroura_. They were chosen to demonstrate
differences and likenesses in proportions of members of the genera.

Ten measurements were taken on each skull, but simple observation
reveals that, in relation to total length of the skull, the beak of the
White-winged Dove is longer than that of the Mourning Dove. Tip of
upper mandible to base of beak averaged 48.6 and 42.9 per cent of the
total length of the skull in the White-winged Dove and Mourning Dove,
respectively. The position of the jugal bar has remained about the same
with respect to the cranial part of the skull, and the entire cranial
part of the skull is almost the same shape in the species studied.

Likewise, in the White-winged Dove the distance from the anterior tip
of the lower mandible to the anterior part of _M. adductor mandibulae
externus_ is relatively longer in relation to the length of the lower
mandible than in the Mourning Dove. Finally, the position of the jugal
with respect to the naso-frontal hinge is about the same in the two
species.

Measurements and calculations indicate that the longer beak of the
White-winged Dove as compared with the Mourning Dove is a function of
the beak itself, not of differences in other parts of the skull.
Measurements of skulls of Eared and Zenaida doves support this view.


OTHER MORPHOLOGICAL FEATURES

In the species dissected, the only variable muscle that I consider
significant in revealing relationships is _M. pseudotemporalis
profundus_. It is markedly enlarged in the White-winged Dove in
relation to the homologous muscle in the Mourning Dove. The muscle is
enlarged in such a manner that a lateral expansion of its mass is
apparent in superficial or dorsal view (compare figures 15 and 16).
This, of course, indicates a muscle with powerful contraction, which
has been unable to enlarge its circumference symmetrically because the
eye is immediately dorsal to the muscle. Therefore it has expanded
laterally. Ventral expansion is blocked by the presence of other
muscles, and medially there is no surface for the insertion of
additional fibers on the orbital process of the quadrate.

The jaw musculature has been known for some time to be highly adaptive
(Beecher, 1951a and b, 1953; Bowman, 1961; Burt, 1930; Engels, 1940 and
Goodman and Fisher, 1962) and it would not be unreasonable, I think, to
expect the jaw muscles of closely related species with similar habits
to be similar. The beak of the White-winged Dove is longer in
proportion to the length and height of the skull (exclusive of the
beak) than is the beak of the Mourning Dove. The lengthened beak is
probably an adaptation for nectar-feeding, which has been documented by
McGregor, Alcorn and Olin (1962:263-264) while investigating
pollinating agents of the Saguaro Cactus (_Cereus giganteus_), and by
Gilman (1911:53) who observed the birds thrusting their bills into the
flowers of the plant. Gilman indicated, however, that he could not be
sure if the birds were seeking insects, pollen, or nectar. In any event
the lengthened bill probably facilitates getting food by birds that
probe parts of flowers. Hensley (1954:202) noted that both Mourning and
White-winged doves were "exceptionally fond of this source of
nourishment." But he also points out an "interesting correlation"
between the presence of the white-wings in the desert and the flowering
of the saguaro. During his studies the appearance of the first
white-wing preceded the opening of the first saguaro flower by two
days. The flowering and fruiting season lasted until August, the month
of termination of the white-wing breeding season.

Since Hensley makes the correlation solely with the white-wings, I
assume that there is no other obvious correlation between plants and
birds among the remainder of the avifauna of the desert. Probably the
Mourning Dove has failed to adapt to nectar-feeding as yet, and the
White-winged Dove is the primary exploiter of this food niche. It
should be noted, also, that the head of the Mourning Dove is smaller
than the white-wing's, and perhaps there is no need for an elongated
beak for reaching deeply into the flowers.

The lengthened bill should produce no difficulties in protraction of
the upper mandible and depression of the lower for the reason that in
the dove there is no known resistance offered to these movements. The
genus _Icterus_ furnishes an example wherein resistance is met in the
process of opening the mandibles; individuals of this genus thrust
their closed bill into certain fruits and forcibly open their mandibles
against the resistance of the pulp by strong protraction and
depression, thus permitting the juices of the fruit to lake and
ultimately to be consumed (Beecher, 1950:53). Beecher refers to the
technique used in fruit-eating as "gaping." The result of gaping in
_Icterus_ should be the presence of a more massive set of muscles
concerned with protraction and depression than is found in non-gaping
groups. Beecher found the situation to be exactly as expected in that
genus and in other genera which also gape. Meadowlarks (_Sturnella_)
and caciques (_Archiplanus_) gape and pry in soil and wood respectively
(Beecher, 1951a:422 and 426).

The lengthened beak would be a problem when the White-winged Dove
attempted to pick up objects such as seeds, which do in fact constitute
the largest percentage of its diet in spite of its nectar-feeding
habit. A similar situation exists in the genus _Icterus_, which is
primarily adapted for gaping even though it shows a preference for
insects when they are abundant (Beecher, 1950:53). The lengthened beak
could be compensated for by (A) migration of the anterior end of the
jugal bar toward the rostral tip of the bill and away from the
fronto-nasal hinge with a simultaneous enlargement of the adductor
muscles of the lower mandible, or (B) enlargement of the one muscle
that functions simultaneously as an efficient retractor of the upper
mandible and adductor of the lower mandible, namely _M.
pseudotemporalis profundus_. _Mm. pterygoideus dorsalis et lateralis_
perform the same function, but because of their position on the lower
mandible they, apparently, are stronger retractors of the upper
mandible than they are adductors of the lower.

It will be recalled that the jugal bar bears the same, or nearly the
same, relationship to the cranium in the white-wing as it does in the
Mourning Dove and that the heads, excluding the beaks of both species,
are of nearly the same proportions. Also, _Mm. adductor mandibulae
externus_ and _pseudotemporalis superficialis_, the chief adductor
muscles of the lower mandible, were not noticeably enlarged in the
white-wing. It is also important to note that other combinations of
migration of bone and/or enlargement of muscles could successfully
solve the problem of providing sufficient leverage for the proper
functioning of the lengthened mandibles, but it is my thesis that the
second alternative sufficed for seed-eating habits and that that is the
adaptation that was established; it is, in fact, the only one present
in the White-winged Dove.

It is unlikely that this enlarged muscle and beak are the remains of
another series of jaw muscles that have converged toward the condition
in Mourning Doves. Columbids are almost unquestionably monophyletic,
and two lines would have had to diverge and then converge. There is no
evidence for such an evolutionary occurrence.


GENERIC RELATIONSHIP

An attempt will be made here to summarize all the available evidence,
direct or indirect, which bears on the problem of relationship of these
genera. The original dissections which are discussed in this report are
only valuable as one more bit of evidence concerning one characteristic
that aids in clarification of generic relationship, and it is only in
conjunction with other evidence that any satisfactory conclusion may be
forthcoming.


Morphology

My dissections demonstrated that, in relation to the size of the doves,
the jaw musculature of all the specimens investigated was so nearly
alike that only one major difference was detected. _M. pseudotemporalis
profundus_ appeared to be enlarged in the White-winged Dove. This might
have been predicted, since the white-wing was also shown to possess an
elongated beak, presumably an adaptation for nectar-feeding, which
would necessitate additional muscle development in order to compensate
for the added length. Measurements recorded from several skulls
indicated that the heads of the birds (excluding the beak) are nearly
proportional.

Perhaps plumage patterns are the most widely used characters for
determining generic relationships of birds. Ridgway (1916:339-385)
followed the columbid classification of Salvadori (1893) using plumage
patterns and body proportions to distinguish between the genera. In the
genus _Zenaidura_ he included the unique specimen _Zenaidura
yucatanensis_, and he placed _auriculata_ in _Zenaida_. The
White-winged Dove was referred to a separate genus, _Melopelia_. He
described the genus _Zenaidura_ in the following manner:

     "Plumage of head, neck and under parts soft and blended;
     bare orbital space moderate, broadest beneath eyes.
     Coloration plain, the proximal secondaries (sometimes
     adjacent wing-coverts and scapulars also) spotted with
     black; rectrices (except middle pair) with a black band
     across postmedian portion, the apical portion paler gray
     than basal portion, sometimes white; a small black
     subauricular spot; adult males with head, neck and anterior
     under parts more or less vinaceous and sides of neck glossed
     with metallic purple."

He noted that the plumage of _Zenaida_ was almost precisely as
described for _Zenaidura_. Also, although all members of _Zenaida_
reputedly possessed twelve rectrices, a characteristic of the genus, it
was later found that _auriculata_ possessed fourteen rectrices. The
species was promptly placed in the genus _Zenaidura_ by Peters
(1934:213-215). In plumage and coloration, _Melopia_ was described as
similar to _Zenaida_ and _Zenaidura_ but without black spots on the
wings.

The White-winged Dove also has twelve rectrices, but Bond (1940:53) and
Goodwin (1958:330-334) considered the number and shape of rectrices to
be of minor importance when compared to the homologous markings of the
plumage. Goodwin stated that his conclusion was emphasized by the fact
that the tail of _auriculata_ is intermediate in length and shape
between those of _macroura_ and _aurita_. In summary Goodwin "lumped"
the genera _Zenaida_ and _Zenaidura_ under the genus _Zenaida_.


Nidification

It has been adequately documented that members of these genera closely
resemble one another in their nesting and egg-laying habits. Bent
(1932:407, 417), Davie (1889:157), Goss (1891:242) and Nice (1922:466)
have described the two, white eggs of the clutch of the Mourning Dove.
They have also noted that their nests are composed mainly of twigs and
may be constructed in trees, shrubs or on the ground. The Eared Dove
has nearly identical habits (Bond, 1961:104), and a similar situation
exists with the Zenaida Dove (Audubon, 1834:356; Bent, 1932:418-419).

Like the other species, White-winged Doves lay two white or buffy eggs
per clutch and build frail nests of sticks (Bent, 1932:431; Wetmore,
1920:141; Baird, Brewer and Ridgway, 1905:377).

The point to be made here is simply this: If the species in question
are to be considered congeneric then it might reasonably be expected
that they would display some similarity in nidification and egg-laying.
If their habits varied considerably it would not necessarily mean that
their relationship was more distant, but similarities can usually be
considered indicative of affinities because they are the phenotypic
expression of the partially unaltered genotype of the common ancestor.


Interbreeding

Intergeneric crosses of columbids in captivity are common, but in
nature there is little evidence that even interspecific crosses occur.
Only one apparent hybrid between members of the genus _Zenaida_ and
genus _Zenaidura_ has ever been discovered. The individual was taken on
the Yucatan peninsula of Mexico, and was described and named as a new
species (_Zenaidura yucatanensis_).

Salvadori (1893:373), Ridgway (1916:353) and Peters (1934:213-215)
agree that _Zenaidura yucatanensis_ Lawrence is a hybrid between
_Zenaidura macroura marginella_ and _Zenaida aurita yucatanensis_.
Ridgway (1916:355), however, notes that "... If _Zenaidura
yucatanensis_ Lawrence should prove to be really a distinct species,
and not a hybrid ... unquestionably _Zenaida_ and _Zenaidura_ can not
be separated generically, since the former is in every way exactly
intermediate between the two groups." In the event that the unique type
is a hybrid, the very fact of its existence supports the hypothesis
that the genera are more closely related than is currently recognized.


Serology

There have been no investigations having as their sole purpose the
clarification of the relationship of the genera _Zenaida_ and
_Zenaidura_. But some work has involved the comparison of the antigenic
content of individual columbids with the antigenic content of a member
of another species of the same family.

Irwin and Miller (1961) tested, along with other columbids, members of
_Zenaida_ and _Zenaidura_ for presence of, 1) species-specific antigens
of _Columba guinea_ (in relation to _Columba livia_) which are
designated A, B, C and E, and, 2) species-specific antigens of _C.
livia_ (in relation to _C. guinea_) which are designated A´, B´, C´ and
E´.

In the first test all five species of _Zenaida_ and _Zenaidura_
possessed antigens A and C, and all but _auriculata_ possessed E. None
of the species gave evidence of the presence of the B antigen of _C.
guinea_ in their blood. In the latter test only _macroura_ had A´, only
_asiatica_ had B´ (_aurita_ was not tested for B´), and none had C´ or
E´.

These results would indicate that the five species are similar
regarding antigenic content of the blood, and the variation is not
consistent within one or the other genus as presently known.


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

The avian genus _Zenaida_ is currently considered to be distinct from
the genus _Zenaidura_ by most columbid taxonomists. The jaw muscles of
six Mourning Doves (_Zenaidura_) and five White-winged Doves
(_Zenaida_) were investigated as to differences and similarities that
might clarify the relationships of the genera. The sizes and
proportions of skulls were also considered in 37 Mourning and
White-winged doves and two Eared Doves. Larger size of _M.
pseudotemporalis profundus_, the muscle that functions simultaneously
as an adductor of the lower jaw and retractor of the upper jaw, in the
White-winged Dove was the character found in the jaw musculature that
could be used to support the contention that _Zenaidura_ and _Zenaida_
represent distinct genera. Larger size of this muscle in the white-wing
seems to be related to its elongated beak. The long beak apparently is
used for nectar-feeding in flowers of the Saguaro Cactus.

Excluding the beak, skulls of the white-wing and Mourning doves are of
nearly the same shape. Previous investigators have shown that in
_Zenaida_ and _Zenaidura_ plumage patterns are similar, nesting habits
and eggs are nearly identical, blood proteins are similar, and one
"intergeneric" hybridization in nature is known.

Consequently, it is concluded that species of the two alleged genera
are congeneric, and I agree with Goodwin (1958) that the genus
_Zenaida_ (Bonaparte, 1838:41) should include the Mourning Dove, Eared
Dove, Socorro Dove, Zenaida Dove, and White-winged Dove. Their Latin
binomina are _Zenaida macroura_, _Zenaida auriculata_, _Zenaida
graysoni_, _Zenaida aurita_, and _Zenaida asiatica_, respectively.

[Illustration: FIG. 1. Medial view of left ramus of lower
mandible of Mourning Dove. × 2-1/2.

FIG. 2. Lateral view of right ramus of lower mandible of
Mourning Dove. × 2-1/2.]

[Illustration: FIG. 3. Dorsal view of lower mandible of
Mourning Dove. × 2-1/2.

FIG. 4. Ventral view of lower mandible of Mourning Dove.
× 2-1/2.]

[Illustration: FIG. 5. Dorsal view of right quadrate of
Mourning Dove. × 5.

FIG. 6. Dorsal view of right pterygoid of Mourning Dove. × 5.

FIG. 7. Ventral view of right quadrate of Mourning Dove. × 5.

FIG. 8. Ventral view of right pterygoid of Mourning Dove. × 5.]

[Illustration: FIG. 9. Right lateral view of skull of Mourning
Dove. × 2-1/2.

FIG. 10. Ventral view of skull of Mourning Dove. × 2-1/2.]

[Illustration: FIG. 11. Cross section of skull of Mourning Dove;
anterior view. × 2-1/2.

FIG. 12. Dorsal view of right quadrate of Mourning Dove showing
movement which protracts the upper mandible (broken line). × 5.]

[Illustration: FIG. 13. Right lateral view of the jaw musculature of
the White-winged Dove; superficial layer, × 5.

FIG. 14. Right lateral view of the jaw musculature of the Mourning
Dove; superficial layer. × 5.]

[Illustration: FIG. 15. Dorsal view of the jaw musculature of the
White-winged Dove (right side); superficial layer. × 5.

FIG. 16. Dorsal view of the jaw musculature of the Mourning Dove
(right side); superficial layer. × 5.]

[Illustration: FIG. 17. Dorsal view of the jaw musculature of the
White-winged Dove (right side); middle layer. × 5.

FIG. 18. Dorsal view of the jaw musculature of the Mourning Dove
(right side); middle layer. × 5.]

[Illustration: FIG. 19. Dorsal view of the jaw musculature of the
White-winged Dove (right side); deep layer. × 5.

FIG. 20. Dorsal view of the jaw musculature of the Morning Dove (right
side); deep layer. × 5.]

[Illustration: FIG. 21. Ventral view of the jaw musculature of the
White-winged Dove (_M. depressor mandibulae_ not shown). × 5.

FIG. 22. Ventral view of the jaw musculature of the Mourning Dove
(_M. depressor mandibulae_ not shown). × 5.]




LITERATURE CITED


ADAMS, L. A.
  1919.  A memoir on the phylogeny of the jaw muscles in recent and
         fossil vertebrates. Annals New York Acad. Sci., 28:51-166.

AUDUBON, J. J.
  1834.  Ornithological biography. Vol. II. Adam & Charles Black,
         Edinburgh, xxxii + 588 pp.

BAIRD, S. F., BREWER, T. M., and RIDGWAY, R.
  1905.  The land birds of North America. Little, Brown, and Company,
         Boston, 560 + xxvii pp.

BEECHER, W. J.
  1950.  Convergent evolution in the American orioles. Wilson Bull.
         62:51-86.

  1951a. Adaptations for food-getting in the American blackbirds. Auk,
         68:411-440.

  1951b. Convergence in the Coerebidae. Wilson Bull., 63:274-287.

  1953.  A phylogeny of the oscines. Auk, 70:270-333.

BENT, A. C.
  1932.  Life histories of North American gallinaceous birds. Bull.
         U. S. Nat. Mus., 162:xi + 490 pp., 93 pls.

BONAPARTE, C. L.
  1838.  Geographical and comparative list of the birds of Europe and
         North America. John Van Voorst, London, vii + 68 pp.

BOND, J.
  1961.  Birds of the West Indies. Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston.
         256 pp., 8 pls., 186 figs.

BOWMAN, R. I.
  1961.  Morphological differentiation and adaptation in the Galapagos
         finches. Univ. California Publ. Zool., 58:vii + 302 pp.,
         22 pls., 74 figs., 63 tables.

BURT, W. H.
  1930.  Adaptive modifications in the woodpeckers. Univ. California
         Publ. Zool., 32:455-524.

CAIN, A. J.
  1956.  The genus in evolutionary taxonomy. Syst. Zool., 5:97-109.

  1959.  Taxonomic concepts. Ibis, 101:302-318.

DAVIE, O.
  1889.  Nests and eggs of North American birds. Hann & Adair,
         Columbus, 455 + xii pp., 13 pls.

EDGEWORTH, F. H.
  1935.  The cranial muscles of vertebrates. Cambridge Univ. Press,
         viii + 493 pp., 841 figs.

ENGELS, W. L.
  1940.  Structural adaptations in thrashers (Mimidae: genus
         _Toxostoma_) with comments on interspecific relationships.
         Univ. California Publ. Zool., 42:341-400, 24 figs., 11 tables.

FISHER, H. I.
  1955.  Some aspects of the kinetics in the jaws of birds. Wilson
         Bull., 67:175-188, 4 figs., 6 tables.

GADOW, H.
  1891.  Vogel: I. Anatomischer Theil. Bronn's Klassen und Ordnungen
         des Thier-Reichs. C. F. Winter, Leipzig, 6:1-1,008, many
         figs., 59 pls.

GILMAN, M. F.
  1911.  Doves on the Pima Reservation. Condor, 13:51-56.

GOODMAN, D. C., and FISHER, H. I.
  1962.  Functional anatomy of the feeding apparatus in waterfowl.
         Southern Illinois Univ. Press, Carbondale, xii + 193 pp.

GOODWIN, D.
  1958.  Remarks on the taxonomy of some American doves. Auk,
         75:330-334.

GOSS, N. S.
  1891.  History of the birds of Kansas. Geo. W. Crane & Co., Topeka,
         692 pp., 35 pls.

HENSLEY, M. M.
  1954.  Ecological relations of the breeding bird populations of the
         desert biome of Arizona. Ecol. Monographs, 24:185-207.

HOFER, H.
  1950.  Zur Morphologie der Kiefermuskulatur der Vogel. Zool. Jahrb.
         Jena (Anat.), 70:427-556, 44 figs.

IRWIN, M. R., and MILLER, W. J.
  1961.  Interrelationships and evolutionary patterns of cellular
         antigens in columbidae. Evolution, 15:30-43.

JACKSON, A. S.
  1941.  The mourning dove in Throckmorton County, Texas, Unpubl.
         manuscript (Abstract).

KIEL, W. H., JR., and HARRIS, J. T.
  1956.  Status of the white-winged dove in Texas. Trans. 21st N.
         Amer. Wildl. Conf., pp. 376-388.

KNAPPEN. P.
  1938.  Preliminary report on some of the important foods of the
         mourning dove in the southeastern U. S. Trans. 3rd N. Amer.
         Wildl. Conf., pp. 776-781.

LAKJER, T.
  1926.  Studien Uber die Trigeminus-versorgte Kaumuskulatur der
         Sauropsiden. C. A. Reitzel Buchhandlung, Kopenhagen, 154 pp.,
         26 pls.

LEOPOLD, A. S.
  1943.  Autumn feeding and flocking habits of the mourning dove in
         southern Missouri. Wilson Bull., 55:151-154.

MCGREGOR, S. E., ALCORN, S. M., and OLIN, G.
  1962.  Pollination and pollinating agents of the saguaro. Ecology,
         43:259-267.

NICE, M. M.
  1922.  A study of the nesting of mourning doves. Auk, 39:457-474;
         40:37-58.

PETERS, J. L.
  1934.  The classification of some American pigeons. Condor,
         36:213-215.

  1937.  Check-list of birds of the world. Vol. III. Harvard Univ.
         Press, Cambridge, xiii + 311 pp.

ROOTH, J.
  1953.  On the correlation between the jaw muscles and the structure
         of the skull in _Columba palumbus_. Kon. Ned. Akad. Wet.;
         Proc. Sect. Sci., Vol. VI, serie C, pp. 251-264.

SALVADORI, T.
  1893.  Catalogue of birds in the British Museum, 21:xvii + 676 pp.,
         15 pls. + 17 pp.

SHUFELDT, R. W.
  1890.  The myology of the raven. MacMillan & Co., London, xix + 343
         pp., 76 figs.

SIMS, R. W.
  1955.  The morphology of the head of the hawfinch. Bull. Brit. Mus.
         (Nat. Hist.) Zool., 2:369-393.

WETMORE, A.
  1920.  Observations of the habits of the white-winged dove. Condor,
         22:140-146.

ZUSI, R. L.
  1959.  The function of the depressor mandibulae muscle in certain
         passerine birds. Auk, 76:537-539.


_Transmitted June 3, 1963._




       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes

Italicized text is shown within _underscores_.

Bold italicized text is shown within ~_tildes and underscores_~.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Jaw Musculature of the Mourning and
White-winged Doves, by Robert L. Merz

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JAW MUSCULATURE--DOVES ***

***** This file should be named 32018-8.txt or 32018-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/0/1/32018/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Diane Monico, and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
