The Project Gutenberg EBook of Thoracic and Coracoid Arteries In Two
Families of Birds, Columbidae and Hirundinidae, by Marion Anne Jenkinson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Thoracic and Coracoid Arteries In Two Families of Birds, Columbidae and Hirundinidae

Author: Marion Anne Jenkinson

Release Date: August 28, 2010 [EBook #33558]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THORACIC AND CORACOID ARTERIES ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Josephine Paolucci
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net.







UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS

MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

Volume 12, No. 13, pp. 553-573, 7 figs.

March, 2, 1964

Thoracic and Coracoid Arteries In Two Families of Birds, Columbidae and
Hirundinidae

BY

MARION ANNE JENKINSON

UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
LAWRENCE
1964

UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS, MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

Editors: E. Raymond Hall, Chairman, Henry S. Fitch,
Theodore H. Eaton, Jr.

Volume 12, No. 13, pp. 553-573, 7 figs.
Published March 2, 1964

UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
Lawrence, Kansas

PRINTED BY THE STATE PRINTER
TOPEKA, KANSAS
1964

[Transcriber's Note: Words surrounded by tildes, like ~this~ signifies
words in bold. Words surrounded by underscores, like _this_, signifies
words in italics.]




Thoracic and Coracoid Arteries In Two Families of Birds, Columbidae and
Hirundinidae

BY

MARION ANNE JENKINSON




CONTENTS

                                                PAGE

INTRODUCTION                                     555

METHODS AND MATERIALS                            556

MYOLOGY AND ANGIOLOGY: HIRUNDINIDAE              557
  Myology                                        557
  Angiology                                      558

MYOLOGY AND ANGIOLOGY: COLUMBIDAE                560
  Myology                                        560
  Angiology                                      560

SUMMARY OF ARTERIAL ARRANGEMENT                  562

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS                       562
  Individual Variation                           562
  Intrafamilial Differences                      563
  Interfamilial Differences                      565

SUMMARY                                          567

LITERATURE CITED                                 573




INTRODUCTION


Most descriptions of the circulatory system of birds, largely the work
of Glenny, have dealt with arteries of the neck and thorax in a wide
variety of species. As a result of his work, Glenny offered several
hypotheses concerning the phylogenetic, hence taxonomic, significance of
differences in some of these vessels. He also described six types of
thoracic arterial arrangements and stated that these categories might
represent various levels of evolution (Glenny, 1955:543-544).

The families Columbidae (pigeons) and Hirundinidae (swallows) have two
nearly extreme arterial types described by Glenny, and are universally
acknowledged as monophyletic. Differences within the families,
therefore, can be considered as valid intrafamilial differences. I have
investigated the thoracic and coracoid arteries and their branches in
members of these two families to determine the degree of individual
variability of the vessels, and the possible causes of interspecific and
intrafamilial differences.




METHODS AND MATERIALS


All specimens studied are in The University of Kansas Museum of Natural
History. They were preserved in alcohol and their blood vessels were not
injected. Dissections were made with the aid of a binocular microscope
at magnifications of 10× and 20×.

Following is a list of the species studied, the number of individuals of
each species dissected, and the catalogue numbers of the specimens. The
nomenclature and classification are those of the American
Ornithologists' Union's _Check-List of North American Birds_, fifth
edition (1957).

    Family Columbidae

    _Zenaidura macroura_ (Linnaeus), Mourning Dove 2: 40325, 40326.
    _Zenaida asiatica_ (Linnaeus), White-winged Dove 1: 40328.
    _Scardafella inca_ (Lesson), Inca Dove 5: 34894, 34896, 34902, 34906,
     34907.
    _Columba livia_ Gmelin, Rock Dove (domestic pigeon) 1: 40321.

    Family Hirundinidae

    _Iridoprocne bicolor_ (Vieillot), Tree Swallow 1: 38101.
    _Progne subis_ (Linnaeus), Purple Martin 5: 37711, 38794, 38796,
     38798, 38804.
    _Stelgidopteryx ruficollis_ (Vieillot), Rough-winged Swallow 1: 38277.
    _Riparia riparia_ (Linnaeus), Bank Swallow 2: 38784, 38785.
    _Hirundo rustica_ (Linnaeus), Barn Swallow 1: 38839.

The following descriptions are of _Progne subis_ and _Scardafella inca_.
Differences in the vascular system in other members of the families
represented by _P. subis_ and _S. inca_ are mentioned at the appropriate
places. The muscles briefly described for each of these two species are
those that are supplied by the thoracic or coracoid arteries or by
branches of the same, and muscles that, by their origin, location, or
insertion, seem to affect the course or origin of one of these arteries.

The following sources have been particularly useful for the terminology
of muscles and of skeletal features: Ashley (1941), Beddard (1898),
Coues (1903), Howard (1929), Howell (1937), and Hudson and Lanzillotti
(1955).

The names used for most arteries are those in common usage for
vertebrates. I have not used the terms "internal mammary" and
"intercostal" artery as substitutes for "thoracic" artery, except when
referring to the work of others. The vessel's homology with the internal
mammary artery of mammals has been denied (Glenny, 1955:541), and the
name "mammary" is certainly not useful descriptively in birds. The term
"intercostal" is less objectionable, except that such a name may call to
mind segmental vessels arising from the dorsal aorta. The term
"thoracic" seems best, as it is reasonably descriptive, and has been
used by Glenny in the majority of his descriptions covering a wide
variety of birds. The name "sternoclavicular" has been used by others as
a synonym for the "coracoid" artery. I have arbitrarily chosen to use
the latter.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I gratefully acknowledge many valuable suggestions in my research and
the preparation of this manuscript from Professors Theodore H. Eaton, A.
Byron Leonard, Richard F. Johnston, Robert M. Mengel, and E. Raymond
Hall. Mr. Abbot S. Gaunt and Miss Sandra Lovett assisted in collecting
specimens. Final drafts of the illustrations were prepared by Mr. Thomas
Swearingen.




MYOLOGY AND ANGIOLOGY: HIRUNDINIDAE

Figs. 1, 2, 3, and 4 illustrate the following muscles and arteries
described for _Progne subis_.


Myology

~_M. pectoralis thoracica_~, Fig. 1. The origin is from slightly less than
the posterior half of the sternum, from the ventral half of the keel,
almost the entire length of the posterolateral surface of the clavicle
and adjacent portion of the sterno-coraco-clavicular membrane, and
tendinously from the ventral thoracic ribs. This massive muscle covers
the entire ventral surface of the thorax and converges to insert on the
ventral side of the humerus on the pectoral surface.

~_M. supracoracoideus_~, Fig. 1. The origin is from the dorsal portion of
the keel and medial portion of the sternum, and is bordered ventrally by
the origin of M. pectoralis thoracica, and laterally by _M.
coracobrachialis posterior_. The origin is also from the manubrium and
the anterolateral portion of the proximal half of the coracoid and to a
slight extent from the sterno-coraco-clavicular membrane adjacent to the
manubrium. This large pinnate muscle converges, passes through the
foramen triosseum, and inserts by a tendon on the external tuberosity of
the humerus, immediately proximal to the insertion of _M. pectoralis
thoracica_.

~_M. coracobrachialis posterior_~, Figs. 1 and 3. The origin is from the
dorsolateral half of the coracoid, anterolateral portion of the sternum
(where the area of origin is bordered medially by _M. supracoracoideus_,
posteriorly by _M. pectoralis thoracica_, and laterally by _M.
sternocoracoideus_), and also to a slight extent from the area of
attachment of the thoracic ribs to the sternum. The muscle fibers
converge along the lateral edge of the coracoid and insert on the median
crest of the humerus immediately proximal to the pneumatic foramen. In
passing from the origin on the sternum to the insertion on the humerus,
the belly of the muscle bridges the angle formed by the costal process
of the sternum and the coracoid.

~_M. sternocoracoideus_~, Figs. 2 and 3. The origin is from the entire
external surface of the costal process of the sternum, and to a small
extent from the extreme proximal ends of the thoracic ribs where they
articulate with the costal process. The muscle inserts on a triangular
area on the dorsomedial surface of the coracoid. Like _M.
coracobrachialis posterior_, this muscle bridges the angle formed by the
costal process and the coracoid.

~_M. subcoracoideus_~ (ventral head), Figs. 2 and 3. The origin is from
the dorsomedial edge of the coracoid at its extreme proximal end, and to
a slight extent from the adjacent portion of the manubrium. The origin
is medial to the insertion of _M. sternocoracoideus_. The ventral head
passes anterodorsally along the medial edge of the coracoid and joins
the dorsal head (not here described). The combined muscle then inserts
by a tendon onto the internal tuberosity of the humerus.

~_M. costi-sternalis_~, Figs. 1, 2, and 3. The origin is from the anterior
edge of the sternal portion of the first four thoracic ribs. This
triangular muscle narrows and inserts on the posterior edge of the apex
of the costal process. The portion arising from the first rib may share
slips with _M. sternocoracoideus_.

~_M. costi-sternalis anterior_~, Figs. 1, 2, and 3. This muscle is
variously developed, and originates from a small area on the ventral end
of the vertebral portion of the last cervical rib. The insertion is on
the apex of the costal process, immediately anterior to the insertion of
_M. costi-sternalis_.

~_Mm. intercostales externus_~, Fig. 1. These muscles extend
posteroventrally between the vertebral portions of successive thoracic
ribs, and between the last cervical and first thoracic ribs. In the more
posterior intercostal spaces these muscles are poorly developed, but
they become progressively better developed anteriorly, and are fully
represented in the most anterior intercostal spaces.

~_Mm. intercostales internus_~, Fig. 3. These muscles resemble the
external intercostal muscles, but extend anteroventrally, with the
muscles being most fully developed posteriorly, and progressively less
so anteriorly.

~_Costopulmonary muscles_~, Fig. 3. This diagonal series of muscle slips
from the thoracic ribs attaches to the aponeurosis covering the lungs.


Angiology

Figs. 3 and 4 show all arteries discussed for this family. The numbers
following the names or descriptions of arteries in the text refer to
numbered arteries in one or both of these figures.

The right and left innominate or brachiocephalic arteries arise from the
aortic trunk and give rise to the common carotid arteries (14). The
major vessel continuing across the thoracic cavity is the subclavian
artery. Classically the subclavian is considered as continuing into the
anterior appendage as the axillary artery. However, in the species
studied, the axillary artery can best be described as a branch from the
subclavian; the pectoral stem forms a more direct continuation of the
subclavian. In traversing the thoracic cavity, the subclavian gives rise
to the thoracic, coracoid, and axillary arteries, and leaves the
thoracic cavity as the pectoral trunk, dorsal to the area where _Mm.
coracobrachialis posterior_ and _sternocoracoideus_ span the angle
formed by the coracoid and costal process.

The pectoral trunk bifurcates into two main pectoral arteries (9), which
penetrate _M. pectoralis thoracica_. Neither the axillary artery nor
these pectoral arteries were traced in my study.

The coracoid artery (2) arises from the ventral face of the subclavian
(1), either opposite the base of, or medial to, the axillary artery
(10). The coracoid artery passes ventrad between the medial edge of the
coracoid and the ventral head of _M. subcoracoideus_, and an artery (7)
is given off to supply that muscle. The main vessel then penetrates _M.
supracoracoideus_ and bifurcates or ramifies into several vessels (12).

Between the origin of the coracoid artery from the subclavian, and the
point where the coracoid artery passes the medial edge of the coracoid,
several branches are given off. These vessels are highly variable in
origin, as described below, and not all were always found. Along with
the coracoid artery, they are termed a "coracoid complex."

The first artery (11) of this complex arises from any one of several
places: from the lateral face of the coracoid artery at its base;
independently from the subclavian immediately lateral to the origin of
the coracoid artery; and from the thoracic artery near its origin. This
vessel travels laterad, parallel to the subclavian, and penetrates _M.
coracobrachialis posterior_ at the same point that the pectoral artery
passes dorsal to that muscle.

Another vessel (common stem of 4 and 5) of the coracoid complex in most
specimens arises from the anterior face of the coracoid artery and
branches into several vessels, some of which (5) supply _M.
subcoracoideus_, and some of which (4) feed _M. coracobrachialis
posterior_. The vessel occasionally shares a common stem with the main
vessel (11) to _M. coracobrachialis posterior_, and in some specimens
arises independently from the subclavian, immediately anterior to the
origin of the coracoid artery. The branch (4) to _M. coracobrachialis
posterior_ was also seen to arise independently from any of the
above-mentioned positions.

Two remaining vessels (6 and 8) are often found as branches from the
coracoid artery. They were small and often were collapsed in the
individuals I dissected, but were most clearly seen in _Iridoprocne
bicolor_. The vessels occasionally had a common base, and in some
specimens only one vessel was found. The first artery (6) passes mediad
into _M. sternocoracoideus_, or continues across that muscle onto the
inner face of the sternum. The second vessel (8) also supplies _M.
sternocoracoideus_ or the inner surface of the sternum, and often a
large branch continues across the dorsal surface of the coracoid to _M.
coracobrachialis posterior_. Fig. 3 shows a composite of these vessels;
not all branches were seen in any one specimen. In the specimen of _I.
bicolor_ a foramen existed on the lateral edge of the coracoid where the
branch (of 8) to _M. coracobrachialis posterior_ passed. An examination
of skeletons of five to 10 individuals each of the five species for
which dissections were made, and of _Petrochelidon pyrrhonota_ (Cliff
Swallow) and _Tachycineta thalassina_ (Violet-green Swallow), in the
University of Kansas collection, showed that most coracoids of these
seven species of swallows had a small notch (as shown in Fig. 4) or a
complete foramen there.

The thoracic artery (3) arises from the subclavian opposite the base of
the coracoid artery, or from the base of the coracoid artery. Of the
five specimens of _P. subis_ dissected, one individual had the former
arrangement on both sides, and one had the latter on both sides, whereas
in the remaining three the thoracic artery arose from the coracoid
artery on one side and from the subclavian on the other side. The
distance between these two possible sites of origin is slight.

The thoracic artery usually passes ventral to _M. costi-sternalis
anterior_. Occasionally a small artery (13) could be traced from the
main trunk of the thoracic artery to that muscle. The main thoracic
artery bifurcates near the insertion of _M. costi-sternalis_, the
branches traveling posteriad on both sides of the muscle. On one side of
one specimen this artery bifurcated immediately after leaving the
subclavian, the dorsal trunk passing dorsal to _M. costi-sternalis
anterior_, and the ventral trunk ventral to the muscle. On the other
side of the same individual the artery passed dorsal to _M.
costi-sternalis anterior_, bifurcating at the normal point.

From the ventral trunk of the thoracic artery a variable number of small
vessels arises to supply the costosternal articulations. The main
ventral trunk bifurcates into two branches, one of which passes onto the
inner face of the sternum, and one of which supplies the posterior two
intercostal spaces.

The dorsal thoracic trunk supplies _M. costi-sternalis_, several dorsal
intercostal areas, and the costopulmonary muscles. Minor variations in
all of the smaller branches of the thoracic artery were common.




MYOLOGY AND ANGIOLOGY: COLUMBIDAE

Figs. 5, 6, and 7 illustrate the following muscles and arteries
described for _Scardafella inca_.


Myology

~_M. pectoralis thoracica~_, Fig. 5. The origin is from approximately the
ventral third of the keel, the lateral and anterior portion of the
clavicle and the adjacent sterno-coraco-clavicular membrane, and from
the lateral portion of the sternum and the fascia overlying the thoracic
ribs. This massive muscle covers the entire ventral surface of the
thorax, converges, and inserts on the pectoral surface on the ventral
side of the humerus.

~_M. supracoracoideus~_, Fig. 5. The origin is from the dorsal two-thirds
of the keel and medial half of the sternum (where the origin is bordered
ventrally, posteriorly, and laterally by the origin of _M. pectoralis
thoracica_) and from the sterno-coraco-clavicular membrane adjacent to
the coracoid. This large pinnate muscle converges, passes through the
foramen triosseum, and inserts by means of a strong tendon on the dorsal
surface of the humerus on the deltoid ridge.

~_M. coracobrachialis posterior_~, Fig. 5. The origin is from a prominent
lateral wing on the posterolateral portion of the coracoid, and from the
lateral surface of the proximal two-thirds of the coracoid. The
insertion is by means of a tendon on the internal tuberosity of the
humerus. Of the muscles described here, this one differs most strikingly
from the homologous muscle in _P. subis_. The difference can be seen by
comparing Figs. 1 and 5.

~_M. sternocoracoideus_~, Figs. 5, 6, and 7. The origin is from the
external, and to a slight extent from the internal, surface of the
costal process. The insertion is on a posterolateral triangular area on
the dorsal surface of the coracoid.

~_M. costi-sternalis_~, Figs. 5 and 6. The origin is from the anterior
edge of the sternal portion of the first three thoracic ribs. The muscle
converges and inserts on the apex of the costal process.

~_M. subcoracoideus_~ (ventral head), Fig. 6. The origin is from the
manubrium and from approximately the posterior half of the coracoid and
on the medial and dorsal surface of that bone, and the medial side of
the sterno-coraco-clavicular membrane adjacent to the coracoid. The
ventral head passes anterodorsally to join with the dorsal head (not
here described), and the combined muscle inserts by a tendon on the
internal tuberosity of the humerus.

~_Mm. intercostales externus_~, Fig. 5. These muscles extend
posteroventrally between successive thoracic ribs and between the last
cervical and first thoracic ribs.

~_Mm. intercostales internus_~, Fig. 7. These muscles extend
anteroventrally between the last three thoracic ribs.

~_Costopulmonary muscles_~, Fig. 7. This series of muscle slips from the
thoracic ribs attaches to the aponeurosis covering the lungs.


Angiology

Figs. 5, 6, and 7 show all arteries discussed for this family. The
numbers following names or descriptions of arteries in the text refer to
numbered arteries in one of these figures. Insofar as possible, the
numbers used for these arteries are the same numbers used for the
homologous vessels in swallows.

The right and left innominate arteries arise from the aortic trunk and
give rise to the common carotid (14) and subclavian (1) arteries. The
latter continues across the thoracic cavity, giving rise to the coracoid
(2) and axillary (10) arteries, and becoming the pectoral trunk. That
trunk swings posteriorly and leaves the thoracic cavity near the apex of
the costal process, as shown in Fig. 7. Where the trunk passes under _M.
sternocoracoideus_, the thoracic artery (3) is given off.

The various branches of the coracoid artery, again referred to as a
"coracoid complex," are as follows: The first branch, from the posterior
face of the coracoid artery, is a relatively large vessel (6) here
termed the sternal artery; it passes mediad across _M.
sternocoracoideus_, sending off a branch (6a) to that muscle. The right
sternal artery continues posteriorly on the mid-line of the inner
surface of the sternum, and appears to send branches into the various
pneumatic foramina of the sternum, but these vessels are minute and
exceedingly difficult to trace accurately. The corresponding left vessel
is smaller and ramifies on the anteromedial surface of the sternum.
Variations found in these vessels were the following: In one specimen of
_S. inca_ the sternal artery had, on both sides, an independent origin
from the subclavian, lateral to the origin of the coracoid artery. In
_Zenaidura macroura_ both right and left sternal arteries were similar
to the left vessel described above, no median longitudinal vessel being
seen. In _Columba livia_ no vessel corresponding to the sternal artery
was seen. In _Zenaida asiatica_ these arteries penetrated _M.
sternocoracoideus_; no branch to the sternum was seen.

A small complex of vessels (4 and 4a) arises from the lateral face of
the coracoid artery and feeds _M. coracobrachialis posterior_, and
occasionally _M. sternocoracoideus_. One branch (4a) passes under the
coracoid and travels along the lateral side of that bone, supplying
small branches to _M. coracobrachialis posterior_, and finally ramifying
on the head of the coracoid. In _C. livia_, _Zenaidura macroura_, and
_Zenaida asiatica_ this complex usually arises independently from the
subclavian, and in one case it arose from the axillary artery.

Two other branches from the coracoid artery were regularly seen. The
first (8) passes across _M. sternocoracoideus_ and appears to supply the
area of the coracoid articulation with the sternum; the second (7)
supplies _M. subcoracoideus_ as the main vessel passes between that
muscle and the coracoid and penetrates _M. suparacoracoideus_. A small
notch on the medial side of the coracoid (shown in Figs. 6 and 7) often
marks the passage of the coracoid artery.

All vessels of the coracoid complex are exceedingly variable, in number,
size, and site of origin.

A prominent vessel (15) is given off from the posterior pectoral artery,
outside the thoracic cavity, passes ventrad, and sends two branches into
_M. supracoracoideus_. No corresponding artery was seen in the swallows
dissected.

The thoracic artery (3), arising from the pectoral stem,
characteristically bifurcates at the anterior end of _M.
costi-sternalis_. The dorsal, and larger, branch passes posteriorly,
sends several small branches to _M. costi-sternalis_, and continues to
the most posterior rib. The ventral trunk bifurcates, one branch passing
along the edge of, and supplying, _M. costi-sternalis_, the other
branch passing onto the surface of the sternum. In some specimens two
such branches to the sternum were seen.




SUMMARY OF ARTERIAL ARRANGEMENT


In both families the vessels that are relatively constant in appearance
are: a subclavian giving rise to the carotid and axillary arteries, and
becoming the pectoral trunk; the thoracic artery arising variously, and
passing posteriorly to the rib cage; and the coracoid complex of
vessels. The coracoid complex includes the coracoid artery, the vessels
to _Mm. sternocoracoideus_ and _coracobrachialis posterior_, and the
sternal artery, which is variously present, and more extensive in some
species than in others.




DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS


In the vessels studied individual variation is marked, but the arterial
arrangement within both families is relatively constant. Interfamilial
differences probably represent responses of the arteries to adaptive
structural differences of other systems of the body.


Individual Variation

The term "individual variation" is used here to mean "continuous
non-sex-associated variation" (see Mayr, Linsley, and Usinger, 1953:93)
found between members of the same species or between the two sides of
the same individual. It is hazardous to define individual variation (and
also interspecific differences, as discussed later) in the origin of one
vessel by relating its location to other vessels, because these may
likewise vary in origin. But, by necessity, certain vessels that are
probably less variable (axillary, carotid, and pectoral arteries) have
been considered here as being constant in origin. If these three vessels
are accepted as reference points, individual variants, as well as
interspecific differences, can easily be described in the thoracic and
coracoid arteries and in their various branches.

The thoracic artery in _P. subis_ arose either from the subclavian
artery, or from the coracoid artery. Likewise in other swallows, both of
these origins were found. In doves the thoracic artery arose
consistently from the pectoral stem, lateral to the origin of the
axillary artery.

The coracoid artery in _P. subis_ and other swallows arose from the
subclavian artery, either opposite the base of the axillary artery, or
medial to that vessel. In all doves studied the coracoid artery arose
from the subclavian medial to the axillary artery. I observed much
individual variation in the branches of the coracoid artery (that is to
say, in the vessels of the coracoid complex). In _S. inca_ the sternal
artery arose either from the coracoid artery, or independently from the
subclavian. As mentioned earlier, in members of both families the
vessels to _Mm. coracobrachialis posterior_ and _subcoracoideus_ are
highly variable, arising in swallows from the coracoid artery or from
the subclavian artery, and in doves from either of these two sites or
from the axillary artery. The distribution of these arteries after their
origin is also diverse.

Individual variation in the arteries of the thorax has been recorded
previously. Bhaduri, Biswas, and Das (1957:2) state that, in the
domestic pigeon, "the origin and course of various smaller arteries...
show noticeable variation," although they do not specifically state to
which vessels they are referring. Fisher (1955:287-288) found
variability in the Whooping Crane, _Grus americana_, of the axillary,
coracoid, thoracic, and pectoral arteries. In one specimen he found
these vessels arising on the right side from the subclavian, in the
sequence just listed, and on the left side all arose from the same
point. Berger (1956:439-440) strongly emphasized the variability of the
vascular system, calling it the most variable in the body. As he stated,
this high degree of individual variation seems to be due to the
embryological development of the system, wherein many of the adult
channels of circulation are derived from embryonic plexuses.


Intrafamilial Differences

In spite of the rather extensive amount of individual variability in
some vessels, I found the over-all pattern of arteries to be relatively
constant within the family Columbidae and within the family
Hirundinidae. There are, nevertheless, several intrafamilial differences
needing some further discussion and clarification.

Others have reported the occasional presence of more than one coracoid
artery on each side in some columbids, these arteries being described as
arising from various sites and being variously named. Bhaduri and Biswas
(1954) described the arterial situation in seven species of the family
Columbidae (_Columba livia_, _Streptopelia tranquebarica_, _S.
chinensis_, _S. senegalensis_, _Chalcophaps indica_, _Treron bicincta_,
and _T. phoenicoptera_) and stated (_op. cit._: 348) that "The
sternoclavicular [= coracoid] artery is similar in all the species, but
the domestic pigeon seems to be unique in that it has, in addition, a
small vessel, the accessory sternoclavicular." This artery was described
later, in the domestic pigeon, as follows (Bhaduri, Biswas, and Das,
1957:5): "A minute and insignificant vessel which has been termed the
_accessory sternoclavicular_ artery... is given off close to the origin
of the sternoclavicular. It passes anteroventrally to supply the
adjacent muscles." Glenny (1955:577) described the arterial pattern
characteristic of members of the family Columbidae (more than 30 species
studied by him) and stated that "three pairs of coracoid arteries are
found in _Otidiphaps nobilis_, normally one or two pairs may be found."
As suggested by Bhaduri and Biswas (1954:348), the "accessory" vessel
probably corresponds to a vessel previously described by Glenny (1940)
in _Streptopelia chinensis_ and referred to as the "coracoid minor."

Bhaduri and Biswas (1954:348) have suggested that "the accessory
sternoclavicular artery occurring sporadically as it does in some
species of diverse groups may not have any phylogenetic value."

In no case did I find more than one coracoid artery on a side. When one
of the highly variable arteries feeding _Mm. coracobrachialis posterior_
and _sternocoracoideus_ (arteries 4 and 4a, Fig. 7) arises from the
subclavian or axillary artery instead of from the coracoid artery, that
vessel may have been interpreted by others as a second (accessory or
minor) coracoid artery. If so, this artery probably does not "occur
sporadically." Rather, its origin from the subclavian, axillary, or
thoracic artery may be sporadic, subject to individual variation, and it
may have been overlooked when it arose from the coracoid artery.

Of the vessels described here, the only one that differed distinctly in
one species was the sternal artery. In _Scardafella inca_ the right
sternal vessel was long, extending down the mid-line of the inner
surface of the sternum, whereas in other columbids the right and left
arteries ramified on the anterior part of the inner surface of the
sternum, or were altogether lacking. I am unable to account for the
differential development of this artery in _S. inca_.

In describing the arterial arrangement in the seven species of Indian
columbids named earlier, Bhaduri and Biswas (1954:348) state that all
species except _Treron phoenicoptera_ have two "internal mammary"
arteries on each side "showing variable sites of origin." These arteries
were later described (Bhaduri, Biswas, and Das, 1957:4-5) as "a slender
(_outer_) _internal mammary_ artery... to the outer wall of the thoracic
cavity" and "a slender (_inner_) _internal mammary_ artery... to supply
the inner wall of the chest cavity." From this description, the question
arises as to whether the "outer" one of these arteries should properly
be called an _external_ instead of _internal_ mammary artery. In any
case, I saw no specimen possessing two thoracic arteries on a side.


Interfamilial Differences

As shown above, there is a high degree of individual variation in the
vessels being considered, while at the same time, few interspecific
differences were noted within the families. On the other hand, the
vascular arrangement of swallows consistently differed from that of
pigeons in the species studied. The differences are most easily
described by discussing the resulting change in the site of origin of
the thoracic artery. In swallows the thoracic artery arises between the
carotid and axillary arteries, either from the stem of the coracoid
artery or independently from the subclavian, but in pigeons the thoracic
artery arises from the pectoral stem, a site of attachment that is
relatively more lateral than in swallows.

This difference, in my opinion, demonstrates well the topological
relationships of various systems of the body, here especially of the
skeletal, muscular, and vascular systems. The location of the thoracic
artery seems to be determined by the particular configuration of
skeletal and muscular elements, although even within the bounds set by
these elements, individual variation in the precise origin of the artery
is possible. In all swallows dissected _Mm. coracobrachialis posterior_
and _sternocoracoideus_ bridge the angle formed by the costal process
and the coracoid. This arrangement makes it necessary for the subclavian
to leave the thoracic cavity dorsal to the costal process, although it
does pass immediately anterior to that process. The thoracic artery
arises from the vessel next to the apex of the costal process, hence
from the subclavian, between the axillary and carotid arteries.

In pigeons, the wing of the coracoid extends farther laterally than does
the costal process, and the apex of the latter is displaced farther
posteriorly than it is in swallows. _M. coracobrachialis posterior_ does
not arise from the sternum, and only part of the costal process serves
as a point of origin for _M. sternocoracoideus_. Consequently, this
region differs from that of swallows; the area between the costal
process and coracoid is not entirely bridged by muscle, and the space
between the two skeletal elements is of a different shape and size. It
seems that these differences have resulted, in pigeons, in the
subclavian assuming a more anterior position with reference to the
costal process. The subclavian in these birds leads into the pectoral
artery, which runs posteriad, passing under _M. sternocoracoideus_ and
leaving the thoracic cavity approximately opposite the apex of the
costal process. The thoracic artery arises immediately opposite the apex
of the costal process from the main artery in the area, as it does in
swallows, except that in this case the adjacent artery from which it
arises is the pectoral stem.

The thoracic area seems to be most "efficiently" arranged when the
thoracic artery arises _opposite the apex of the costal process, from
whatever main artery is closest to that site_. This arrangement existed
in all species studied. Considering the differences in skeletal and
muscular structures, between pigeons and swallows, it would be much more
remarkable if an alternative were the case, that is to say if the
thoracic artery _had the same site of attachment on the subclavian_ in
both groups.

A comparison of these suggestions with statements made previously about
these arteries seems necessary. When Glenny (1955) summarized his
accumulative findings, concerning the main arteries in the region of the
heart, based on individuals representing more than 750 avian species of
27 orders and 120 families, he described five types of thoracic arteries
that were distinguished by differences in the site of their origin, and
one type in which there were two thoracic arteries on each side. His
statements regarding these differences were as follows (Glenny,
1955:543-544):

     "The thoracic, intercostal, or internal mammary artery of
     birds... is found to arise at slightly different relative
     positions--from a point at the base of the inferior pectoral
     artery to a point near the base of the coracoid or
     sternoclavicular artery, and in some instances both of these
     vessels have a common root from the subclavian artery. Such
     differences are found to be of common occurrence within
     several orders of birds. In the Galliformes and the
     Passeriformes there appears to be a graded series in the
     sites of attachment of the thoracic artery from a lateral to
     a medial position. As a result of these observations,
     numerical values can be assigned to the site of attachment
     of the intercostal or thoracic artery, and these values may
     come to be used as an index in specific levels of
     evolution....

     "The medial migration of the thoracic artery appears to have
     some phylogenetic significance as yet not understood."

The six types of thoracic arteries described in Glenny's classification
were distinguished as follows (Glenny, 1955:544):

     "Type 1: attachment to the pectoral stem lateral to the
     axillary.

     "Type 2: attachment to the subclavian between the axillary
     and coracoid.

     "Type 3: attachment to the subclavian at the base of the
     coracoid.

     "Type 4: attachment to the subclavian, but with a common
     root for both the coracoid and thoracic.

     "Type 5: attachment to the subclavian medial to both the
     axillary and coracoid.

     "Type 6: two separate thoracic arteries are present; the
     primary thoracic is the same as type 1 above, while the
     secondary thoracic is the same as type 3 or type 4 above."

Possibly the thoracic artery has undergone migration but apparent
differences in its origin might well be due to differences in other
vessels of the thoracic area. Additionally, there seems to be no reason
to assume that the lateral position of the thoracic artery is the
primitive one, or that the medial is the derived position, as is implied
by the phrase "medial migration." Although the lateral site of
attachment (type 1) is predominant in the lower orders of birds, and the
medial attachment is found primarily in Passeriformes, a fact which may
indicate that type 1 is the more primitive, it must nevertheless be kept
in mind that a sequence of a single morphological character does not
necessarily represent the phylogenetic sequence of the character itself
(see Mayr, 1955:41).

Also, a given arterial arrangement might be independently derived more
than once. If such has been the case, similarities in arterial
arrangements in different taxa would sometimes be "chance similarities,"
that is to say, "resemblance in characteristics developed in separate
taxa by independent causes and without causal relationship involving the
similarity as such" (Simpson, 1961:79).

The particular arrangement of the arteries of the thoracic area also
seems to be of limited value as a clue to taxonomic relationships. If
the origin of any artery is determined by skeletal and muscular
features, as I suggest, the artery perhaps ought not be considered as a
separate character, but as part of a "character complex" that varies as
a unit (see Mayr, Linsley, and Usinger, 1953:123). The skeleton offers a
potential fossil record for consideration. Changes in the skeleton and
muscles, great enough to affect the blood vessels, would probably be
detected more easily than would the resulting vascular changes. Also, I
did not find as much individual variation in the skeleton and muscles in
the area studied as I did in the vascular system. In other words, within
the bounds established by the skeletal and muscular features, the artery
still exhibited individual variation in exact origin.




SUMMARY


The origin, distribution, and individual variation of the thoracic and
coracoid arteries, and their branches, have been studied in four species
of the family Columbidae (pigeons) and in five species of the family
Hirundinidae (swallows). These arteries are described for _Scardafella
inca_ (Inca Dove) and _Progne subis_ (Purple Martin). Muscles that are
supplied by these vessels, and muscles the particular configuration of
which seems to effect the arrangement of the arteries have also been
described. Correlation of the arteries observed with those named and
described by other workers has been attempted.

In most of the vessels studied there is a high degree of individual
variation, but few interspecific differences were noticed within either
family. Differences in the arteries of the thorax between the two
families are described by discussing the resulting different origins of
the thoracic artery. In swallows the thoracic artery arises from either
the subclavian artery or the coracoid artery, whereas in pigeons it
arises from the pectoral trunk. This difference in site of attachment
seems to be a result of differences between the two families in muscular
and skeletal elements of the thorax.

The particular site of attachment of the thoracic artery is of limited
value as a taxonomic character. Several considerations influenced this
conclusion. (1) If the location of the artery is determined by skeletal
and muscular elements, these associated structures must be considered
taxonomically as a "character complex" (a set of characters varying as a
unit). (2) Even within the bounds established by the skeleton and
muscles, the artery displays a high degree of individual variation in
exact origin. (3) A given arterial arrangement could have been derived
independently many times. (4) Because differences are defined relative
to other likewise variable vessels, supposed similarities or differences
in the one artery may be artifacts of the system of description.

My findings and interpretations do not support previous suggestions that
the thoracic artery has undergone a mediad migration, and that the
various sites of attachment of that vessel may come to represent various
levels of evolution. The primitive site of attachment of the vessel is
unknown, and it seems to me that it has not been sufficiently
demonstrated that the vessel has undergone any "migration."

[Illustration: FIG. 1. _Progne subis._ Lateral view of left half of
thorax. _M. pectoralis thoracica_ (area of insertion indicated by dotted
line) has been removed. Muscles not described in text are not shown. (×
1.5.)]

[Illustration: FIG. 2. _Progne subis._ Lateral view of left half of
thorax. Same view as shown in Fig. 1, but with _Mm. supracoracoideus_,
_coracobrachialis posterior_, and _intercostales externus_ removed. (×
1.5.)]

[Illustration: FIG. 3. _Progne subis._ Medial view of left half of
thorax. Not all muscles shown. See Fig. 4 for identification of
arteries. (× 1.5.)]

[Illustration: FIG. 4. _Progne subis._ Lateral view of left half of
thorax. (× 1.5.)

(Applies also to Fig. 3.)

     1. Subclavian artery.
     2. Coracoid artery.
     3. Thoracic artery.
     4. (Unnamed.) Supplies _M. coracobrachialis posterior_.
     5. (Unnamed.) Supplies _M. subcoracoideus_.
     6. (Unnamed.) Supplies _M. sternocoracoideus_ and sternum.
     7. (Unnamed.) Supplies _M. subcoracoideus_.
     8. (Unnamed.) Supplies _M. sternocoracoideus_, _M. coracobrachialis
    posterior_, and sternum.
     9. Pectoral artery.
    10. Axilliary artery.
    11. (Unnamed.) Supplies _M. coracobrachialis posterior_.
    12. (Unnamed.) Supplies _M. supracoracoideus_.
    13. (Unnamed.) Supplies _M. costi-sternalis anterior_.
    14. Carotid artery.]

[Illustration: FIG. 5. _Scardafella inca._ Lateral view of left half of
thorax. _M. pectoralis thoracica_ (area of insertion indicated by dotted
line) has been removed. Muscles not described in text are not shown. See
legend for Fig. 7 for identification of arteries. (× 1.)]

[Illustration: FIG. 6. _Scardafella inca._ Lateral view of left half of
thorax. See legend for Fig. 7 for identification of arteries. (× 1.)]

[Illustration: FIG. 7. _Scardafella inca._ Medial view of left half of
thorax. (× 1.)

KEY

(Applies also to Figs. 5 and 6.) Numerals not used are those used for
_Progne subis_ for which no homologous artery occurs in _Scardafella
inca_.

     1. Subclavian artery.
     2. Coracoid artery.
     3. Thoracic artery.
     4. (Unnamed.) Supplies _Mm. coracobrachialis posterior_ and
    _sternocoracoideus_.
    4a. (Unnamed.) Supplies _M. coracobrachialis posterior_.
     6. Sternal artery. (Shown as it appears on _right_ side. Left sternal
    artery not so extensive.)
    6a. (Unnamed.) Supplies _M. sternocoracoideus_.
     7. (Unnamed.) Supplies _M. subcoracoideus_.
     8. (Unnamed.) Supplies coracoid-sternal articulation.
     9. Pectoral artery.
    10. Axillary artery.
    12. (Unnamed.) Supplies _M. supracoracoideus_.
    14. Carotid artery.
    15. (Unnamed.) Supplies _M. supracoracoideus_.]




LITERATURE CITED


AMERICAN ORNITHOLOGISTS' UNION

1957. Check-List of North American birds. Baltimore, Maryland, Amer.
Ornith. Union, xiv + 691 pp.


ASHLEY, J. F.

1941. A study of the structure of the humerus in the Corvidae. Condor,
43:184-195.


BEDDARD, F. E.

1898. The structure and classification of birds. London, Longmans,
Green, & Co., xx + 548 pp.


BERGER, A. J.

1956. Anatomical variation and avian anatomy. Condor, 58:433-441.


BHADURI, J. L., and BISWAS, B.

1954. The main cervical and thoracic arteries of birds. Series 2.
Columbiformes, Columbidae, part 1. Anat. Anz., 100:337-350.


BHADURI, J. L., BISWAS, B., and DAS, S. K.

1957. The arterial system of the domestic pigeon (_Columba livia_
Gmelin). Anat. Anz., 104:1-14.


COUES, E.

1903. Key to North American birds. Vol. I, Fifth edit. Boston, The Page
Company, xlii + 535 + [55] pp.


FISHER, H. I.

1955. Major arteries near the heart in the Whooping Crane. Condor,
57:286-289.


GLENNY, F. H.

1940. The main arteries in the region of the heart of three species of
doves. Bull. Fan Mem. Inst. Biol., Zool. ser., vol. 10, pt. 4, 271-278.
(Not seen.)

1955. Modifications of pattern in the aortic arch system of birds and
their phylogenetic significance. Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., 104:525-621.


HOWARD, H.

1929. The avifauna of Emeryville Shellmound. Univ. Calif. Publs. Zool.,
32:301-394.


HOWELL, A. B.

1937. Morphogenesis of the shoulder architecture: Aves. Auk, 54:364-375.


HUDSON, G. E., and LANZILLOTTI, P. J.

1955. Gross anatomy of the wing muscles in the family Corvidae. Amer.
Midl. Nat., 53:1-44.


MAYR, E.

1955. Comments on some recent studies of song bird phylogeny. Wilson
Bull., 67:33-44.


MAYR, E., LINSLEY, E. G., and USINGER, R. L.

1953. Methods and principles of systematic zoology. New York,
McGraw-Hill Book Co., x + 336 pp.


SIMPSON, G. G.

1961. Principles of animal taxonomy. New York, Columbia Univ. Press, xiv
+ 247 pp.


_Transmitted June 24, 1963._





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Thoracic and Coracoid Arteries In Two
Families of Birds, Columbidae and Hirundinidae, by Marion Anne Jenkinson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THORACIC AND CORACOID ARTERIES ***

***** This file should be named 33558-8.txt or 33558-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/5/5/33558/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Josephine Paolucci
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
